O Jesu, my lord, my lord!
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Uncle, what news?
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
teacher. An the indentures be drawn, I'll away
Or hitherwards intended speedily,
There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.
green, when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy
Go, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I have
And since your coming hither have done enough
Ye lie, hostess: Bardolph was shaved and lost many
'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad, I'll make one, an I
Well, here is my leg.
Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so
SCENE II. The highway, near Gadshill.
door would speak with you: he says he comes from
For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen,
In strange eruptions, oft the teeming earth
Exit
that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths:
No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to
And why not as the lion?
A kingdom for it was too small a bound,
charge of foot, and I know his death will be a
roaring of a lion's whelp.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopp'd off:
No, I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.
Because you are not of our quality,
land now as cheap as stinking mackerel.
ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me,
in King Cambyses' vein.
Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare:
by the moon. As, for proof, now: a purse of gold
What's the matter! there be four of us here have
points in my target, thus.
Give me thy hand: thou shalt have a share in our
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And on this north side win this cape of land,
Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,
'twere not as good deed as drink, to break the pate
Must bide the touch, for, sir, at Shrewsbury,
Without the taste of danger and reproof:
Where hast been, Hal?
O, 'tis our setter: I know his voice. Bardolph,
agrees the devil and thee about thy soul, that thou
That villanous abominable misleader of youth,
Dowlas, filthy dowlas: I have given them away to
I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may be
Of death or death's hand for this one-half year.
The music plays
The thieves have bound the true men. Now could thou
Which he in this adventure hath surprised,
how oft, that ring was copper!
Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!
guests: thou shalt find me tractable to any honest
led my ragamuffins where they are peppered: there's
Rated mine uncle from the council-board,
Come hither, Francis.
Enter the KING, NORTHUMBERLAND, WORCESTER, HOTSPUR, SIR WALTER BLUNT, with others
Which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it:
in it. A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack,
as a gib cat or a lugged bear.
Mine, Hal, mine.
Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?
O that Glendower were come!
So I told him, my lord, and I said I heard your
The king is to be feared as the lion: dost thou
For powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasons
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,
earl or duke, I can assure you.
I'll make a fat pair of gallows, for if I hang, old
do it with unwashed hands too.
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
The southern wind
Hath faulty wander'd and irregular,
For what offence have I this fortnight been
thou layest the plot how.
Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats,
Enter BLUNT
of all cess.
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
Had been alive this hour,
to hear his monstrous devices.
How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
of all compass.
Now Hal, to the news at court: for the robbery,
O villain! thy lips are scarce wiped since thou
Lay out, lay out.
Within her womb, which, for enlargement striving,
Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride
Redeeming time when men think least I will.
Lords, give us leave, the Prince of Wales and I
Have any way your good deserts forgot,
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
To be deposed and shortly murdered.
I come with gracious offers from the king,
Exeunt King Henry, Blunt, and train
Exit Francis
that I can drink with any tinker in his own language
this shrill addition, 'Anon, anon, sir! Score a pint
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,
Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge,
even now into my hand by an under-skinker, one that
Lends mettle to us all!
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,
To this we swore our aid. But in short space
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
at home and be hanged.
As by discharge of their artillery,
He? alas, he is poor, he hath nothing.
These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust at
Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone.
You were of our determination!
This is the deadly spite that angers me,
Might so have tempted him as you have done,
He gave his nose and took't away again,
Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to
streets, and no man regards it.
And lards the lean earth as he walks along:
Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.
Enter Hostess
Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling dost
Exeunt
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,
They whistle
To other friends, and so farewell, Sir Michael.
And that his friends by deputation could not
As thou art to this hour was Richard then
These signs have mark'd me extraordinary,
riding to London with fat purses: I have vizards
Audacious cruelty. If that the king
To bloody battles and to bruising arms.
as had as lieve hear the devil as a drum, such as
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
great an opposition.' Say you so, say you so? I say
They fight: DOUGLAS flies
[Within]  Francis!
'Tis not due yet, I would be loath to pay him before
And shape of likelihood, the news was told,
The devil.
For God's sake. cousin, stay till all come in.
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
Go, ye giddy goose.
none but good house-holders, yeoman's sons, inquire
And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
The more and less came in with cap and knee,
And therefore lost that title of respect
Three times they breathed and three times did
He held me last night at least nine hours
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate:
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a
further afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt
thief, for the poor abuses of the time want
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,
Why, we will set forth before or after them, and
Not mine, in good sooth.
Of our proceedings kept the earl from hence:
Not wind? it shall, it must, you see it doth.
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
He is walked up to the top of the hill: I'll go seek him.
Well,
Well, I will back him straight: O esperance!
but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters and
medicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged, it
[Within]  At hand, quoth pick-purse.
company last night at supper, a kind of auditor, one
In buckram?
So soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.
Semblably furnish'd like the king himself.
Who shall say me nay?
The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king,
I call thee coward! I'll see thee damned ere I call
I thank your grace for this high courtesy,
Go, hide thee behind the arras: the rest walk up
one that no persuasion can do good upon.
If well-respected honour bid me on,
Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head
How now, my sweet creature of bombast!
Yea, my good lord.
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm'd
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
He would himself have been a soldier.
By smiling pick-thanks and base news-mongers,
To do him wrong or any way impeach
By how much better than my word I am,
tavern and tavern: but the sack that thou hast
Come, wilt thou see me ride?
So I do, against my will.
Sixteen at least, my lord.
Our duty this way lies, for God's sake come.
chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.
sin, then many an old host that I know is damned: if
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf,
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
Did give him that same royalty he wears,
Therefore, I say--
Will easily be granted. You, my lord,
it!
'as sure as day,'
Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman
came in foot and hand, and with a thought seven of
when thou needest him, there thou shalt find him.
The man, I do assure you, is not here,
Worcester, get thee gone, for I do see
If life did ride upon a dial's point,
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
Not shall we need his help these fourteen days.
We offer fair, take it advisedly.
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
reason: thou seest I am pacified still. Nay,
lead this life long, I'll sew nether stocks and mend
villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had
score hogsheads. I have sounded the very
Of that same noble prelate, well beloved,
flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is,
of fear and cold heart, will he to the king and lay
bottle of sack: our soldiers shall march through,
We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all.
Mingled his royalty with capering fools,
Are not you a coward? answer me to that: and Poins there?
I will not sing.
that he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster,
fat chuffs: I would your store were here! On,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry:
Wilt thou believe me, Hal? three or four bonds of
he that died o' Wednesday. Doth he feel it? no.
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him
Case ye, case ye, on with your vizards: there 's
Upon his Irish expedition,
'Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by the
Uncertain of the issue any way.
March all one way and be no more opposed
again for all the coin in thy father's exchequer.
Your majesty's good thoughts away from me!
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
Being with his presence glutted, gorged and full.
I prithee, speak, we will not trust our eyes
Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and POINS
And saved the treacherous labour of your son.
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit:
That all in England did repute him dead:
Of my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
Re-enter GLENDOWER with the ladies
That you are fool'd, discarded and shook off
Poins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
robes, burning, burning. If thou wert any way
You rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I
And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent him
For I myself at this time have employ'd him.
ACT V
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!
Fie, cousin Percy! how you cross my father!
Against my power, thrice from the banks of Wye
For thou has lost thy princely privilege
already in the field.
Is guilty of this fault and not my son.
O, my good lord, why are you thus alone?
But rather drowzed and hung their eyelids down,
His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
What beast! why, an otter.
save thy grace,--majesty I should say, for grace
To set the exact wealth of all our states
Enter PRINCE HENRY and PETO, marching, and FALSTAFF meets them playing on his truncheon like a life
Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge:
am a peppercorn, a brewer's horse: the inside of a
I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in some
To make us strangers to his looks of love.
to the dead. But will it not live with the living?
Four, Hal, I told thee four.
They are up already, and call for eggs and butter,
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
No, here it is.
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eight
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury
This infant warrior, in his enterprises
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like
out water in foul way?
question to be asked. There is a thing, Harry,
Than if the earl were here, for men must think,
Than Harry Percy's wife: constant you are,
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
prithee, call in Falstaff: I'll play Percy, and
For this advertisement is five days old:
Jack, then am I no two-legged creature.
My reformation, glittering o'er my fault,
an arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no.
the truth, stolen from my host at Saint Alban's, or
bawdy-houses, and one poor penny-worth of
It must of force.
And in the closing of some glorious day
As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke.
Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this last
Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,
Not so, Sir Walter: we'll withdraw awhile.
Hal! a plague upon you both! Bardolph! Peto!
Enter the Travellers
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Of favour from myself and all our house,
drink, and drink sooner than pray: and yet, zounds,
He shall be answerable, and so farewell.
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
A couching lion and a ramping cat,
your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so
And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
a plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!
O, I could wish this tavern were my drum!
Talk not of dying: I am out of fear
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
time this two and thirty years, God reward me for
shillings and sixpence' and 'You are welcome,' with
thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse. Thou
I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,
As not a soldier of this season's stamp
And breed a kind of question in our cause,
a man doth of a Death's-head or a memento mori: I
Betwixt my love and your high majesty.
Some eight or ten.
What sayest thou, Jack?
Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
Was parmaceti for an inward bruise,
By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
Re-enter the EARL OF DOUGLAS
To make that worse, suffer'd his kinsman March,
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
When yet you were in place and in account
Into the good thoughts of the world again,
they will away presently.
me. If then thou be son to me, here lies the point,
all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eye
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
prize, and have it, yea, and can show it you here in
The which if He be pleased I shall perform,
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,
That you foresee not what impediments
Farewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust.
And bring him out that is but woman's son
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
life! I want work.' 'O my sweet Harry,' says she,
He was perfumed like a milliner,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
That wisdom, loyalty and mere dislike
With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing:
Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff,
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
I fear thou art another counterfeit,
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
believed, so, if not, let them that should reward
I will, captain: farewell.
O Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books in
Do not, my lord.
Albeit considerations infinite
By south and east is to my part assign'd:
The eye of reason may pry in upon us:
steal cream.
Had his great name profaned with their scorns
You lie, ye rogue, 'tis going to the king's tavern.
Colour her working with such deadly wounds,
Are confident against the world in arms.
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,
Here comes your uncle.
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
Thou art perfect.
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.
in Warwickshire? My good Lord of Westmoreland, I
To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,
He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
drawer? come, what's the issue?
this dagger my sceptre, and this cushion my crown.
Yea, or to-night.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
not but to die a fair death for all this, if I
I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,
To keep his anger still in motion.
I had rather be a kitten and cry mew
snorting like a horse.
And from this swarm of fair advantages
hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?
Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us
To Northumberland
should be 'By this fire, that's God's angel:' but
As if he master'd there a double spirit.
How! poor? look upon his face, what call you rich?
Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.
rogues, give me my horse, and be hanged!
Let it be seen to-morrow in the battle
Yet such extenuation let me beg,
But to say I know more harm in him than in myself,
Sit, cousin Percy, sit, good cousin Hotspur,
I can speak English, lord, as well as you,
Exeunt
day? Unless hours were cups of sack and minutes
we'll to Sutton Co'fil' tonight.
do thou stand in some by-room, while I question my
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.
on her, for they ride up and down on her and make
I'll never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales!
Enter PRINCE HENRY
to, you are a woman, go.
Lord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower,
Tut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie them
less than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.
Exit PRINCE HENRY
go
Cheerly, my lord	how fares your grace?
What, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh
hast thou no faith in thee?
Here the lady sings a Welsh song
to meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.
Whose power was in the first proportion,
What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of
So please your majesty, I would I could
God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
What's o'clock, Francis?
Your money!
prince, no, fie!
Useth the sparrow, did oppress our nest,
no more valour in that Poins than in a wild-duck.
Come, sing.
Nay,
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
He had his part of it, let him pay.
And since this business so fair is done,
What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall
Now, master sheriff, what is your will with me?
Jesus bless us!
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.
To the Welsh lady's bed.
Falstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. And tell
Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, and
chamberlain, for thou variest no more from picking
players as ever I see!
leave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that
do not, call me villain and baffle me.
the ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste: Percy is
sword so hacked?
Of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus,
bastinado and made Lucifer cuckold and swore the
As is deliver'd to your majesty:
Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,
the ears of profiting, that what thou speakest may
My good lord,
SCENE III. Plain between the camps.
Come, let's hear, Jack, what trick hast thou now?
cry you mercy: I thought your honour had already been
night to catch my horse, if I did not think thou
Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we
Item, Sack, two gallons, 5s. 8d.
think I keep thieves in my house? I have searched,
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
KING HENRY enters with his power. Alarum to the battle. Then enter DOUGLAS and SIR WALTER BLUNT
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
Worse than a smoky house: I had rather live
good boy, by the Lord, so they call me, and when I
Never did base and rotten policy
were masters of their wealth. Mark now, how a plain
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
the most comparative, rascalliest, sweet young
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
Three knights upon our party slain to-day,
Enter HOTSPUR and DOUGLAS
Choler, my lord, if rightly taken.
would say so.
Good cousin, be advised, stir not tonight.
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
And I beseech you, let not his report
You shall have your desires with interest
In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd.
I see a good amendment of life in thee, from praying
be out of all compass, out of all reasonable
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
man knows where to have me, thou knave, thou!
Why, then, it is like, if there come a hot June and
in the point, poor jade, is wrung in the withers out
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
So did he never the sparrow.
The sheriff and all the watch are at the door: they
And majesty might never yet endure
Item, Anchovies and sack after supper, 2s. 6d.
And thou a natural coward, without instinct.
Nothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it him
How now, how now, mad wag! what, in thy quips and
fox, and for womanhood, Maid Marian may be the
Come, let us take a muster speedily:
[Within]  Francis!
How goes the field?
from your encounter, then they light on us.
wife. 'Rivo!' says the drunkard. Call in ribs, call in tallow.
remember me, his name is Falstaff: if that man
But let my favours hide thy mangled face,
And never yet did insurrection want
What he will do: but if he will not yield,
That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.
soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press me
yet our horse not packed. What, ostler!
Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again: and
hangman, for I know thou worshippest St. Nicholas
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with fear
For fear of swallowing, but with nimble wing
Against that great magician, damn'd Glendower,
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens.
On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
To face the garment of rebellion
And pass them current too. God's me, my horse!
In such a parley should I answer thee.
valour is discretion, in the which better part I
I understand thy kisses and thou mine,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.
Speak of Mortimer!
In praise of Henry Percy: by my hopes,
of dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffed
But mark'd him not a word. O, he is as tedious
make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments
on thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hanged!
And, which became him like a prince indeed,
hook--what a plague call you him?
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
Thou liest, thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.
Come current for an accusation
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood,
'Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had
fellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the blood
To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast
With telling me of the mouldwarp and the ant,
What, ostler! come away and be hanged!
I'll make it greater ere I part from thee,
comest to thy father: if thou love me, practise an answer.
many in our land by the name of pitch: this pitch,
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot,
We breathe too long: come, cousin Westmoreland,
bigger than pins' heads, and they have bought out
How now, my lady the hostess! what sayest thou to
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
heir-apparent? should I turn upon the true prince?
coward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt
hand-saw--ecce signum! I never dealt better since
I have done, i' faith.
What with the injuries of a wanton time,
Enter POINS
And move in that obedient orb again
then? In respect of the love he bears our house:
To show the line and the predicament
back again with advantage. Be with me betimes in
I saw young Harry, with his beaver on,
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt, and would to God
What hast thou found?
Pray God you do.
Enter WORCESTER and VERNON
O, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed able
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips:
The quality and hair of our attempt
unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, and
Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!
Out, ye rogue! Play out the play: I have much to
That ever-valiant and approved Scot,
therefore I'll hide me.
standing-tuck,--
But I will beard him.
All's done, all's won, here breathless lies the king.
And bound them.
He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners,
He never did encounter with Glendower:
the red-nose innkeeper of Daventry. But that's all
So strongly that they dare not meet each other,
third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'll
A hundred thousand rebels die in this:
By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us--
I think this be the most villanous house in all
perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-light!
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
Anon, anon, sir.
Strike, down with them, cut the villains' throats:
For, bear ourselves as even as we can,
moon, and let men say we be men of good government,
If I were much in love with vanity!
When I will wear a garment all of blood
But, my lads, my lads, to-morrow morning, by four
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
A shorter time shall send me to you, lords:
We two saw you four set on four and bound them, and
Why, so can I, or so can any man,
Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
For of no right, nor colour like to right,
shillings an ell. You owe money here besides, Sir
Nor shall it, Harry, for the hour is come
prologue to an egg and butter.
And cuts me from the best of all my land
so, if not, let him enter: if I become not a cart
Knight of the Burning Lamp.
appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at
What, ho! chamberlain!
quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.
Let me see--about Michaelmas next I shall be--
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Took it in snuff, and still he smiled and talk'd,
he would cudgel you.
Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room, and lend me
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS
me now, thou naughty varlet, tell me, where hast
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut
These lies are like their father that begets them,
drive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee,
Peace! she sings.
forsworn his company hourly any time this two and
An if the devil come and roar for them,
thee coward: but I would give a thousand pound I
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance:
Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?
I do not think a braver gentleman,
I'll show thee a precedent.
Why, that's well said.
Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs
Pride, haughtiness, opinion and disdain:
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
For well you know we of the offering side
Through Gloucestershire, by which account,
The lady speaks again in Welsh
That, in his secret doom, out of my blood
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
it?
dreamest not of, the which for sport sake are
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.
Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain,
The king will always think him in our debt,
And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin,'
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
Thy state is taken for a joined-stool, thy golden
Where stain'd nobility lies trodden on,
maintained that salamander of yours with fire any
A rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.
And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,
have great charge.
O monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!
But yesternight: when all athwart there came
London road for fleas: I am stung like a tench.
I have inquired, so has my husband, man by man, boy
Prithee, let him alone, we shall have more anon.
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.
Should be the father to so blest a son,
Ere he by sickness had been visited:
Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread,
Exeunt Lords
Exeunt Hostess, FRANCIS, and BARDOLPH
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not:
What, fought you with them all?
Indeed, Sir John, you said so.
with the rusty curb of old father antic the law? Do
To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
The king is kind, and well we know the king
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,
north, Percy, and he of Wales, that gave Amamon the
and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of
compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as
I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.
No, yet time serves wherein you may redeem
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
There is no seeming mercy in the king.
And so I hear he doth account me too,
comfit-maker's wife. 'Not you, in good sooth,' and
To see how fortune is disposed to us,
A good mouth-filling oath, and leave 'in sooth,'
Poins!
the morning, and so, good morrow, Peto.
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
hand? come, tell us your reason: what sayest thou to this?
for the light in thy face, the son of utter
perpendicular,--
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer
more the pity, his white hairs do witness it, but
You have not sought it! how comes it, then?
in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell
That Douglas and the English rebels met
And like bright metal on a sullen ground,
and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.
above. Now, my masters, for a true face and good
On any soul removed but on his own.
of you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is, and said
And God forgive them that so much have sway'd
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Our hands are full of business: let's away,
[Within]   Anon, anon.
With like advantage on the other side,
banish Bardolph, banish Poins: but for sweet Jack
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou,
And I dare well maintain it with my life,
Deliver what you will, I'll say 'tis so.
All's one for that.
filled up with guts and midriff. Charge an honest
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
And all the fertile land within that bound,
O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to
O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy
drunkest last.
And thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep,
away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared
And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,
And may be so we shall.
Began to give me ground: but I followed me close,
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,
when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.
beard is turned white with the news: you may buy
Did you beg any? God forbid!
Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE HENRY, and others
ostler bring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell,
and I'll play my father.
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
That ever said I hearken'd for your death.
I did, I saw him dead,
toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies no
With lustier maintenance than I did look for
Arm, arm with speed: and, fellows, soldiers, friends,
Break with your wives of your departure hence:
Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK and SIR MICHAEL
fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck
the poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee, thou art the
Wherein you range under this subtle king,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
With quiet hours, for I do protest,
in a quarter--of an hour, paid money that I
need no more weight than mine own bowels. I have
knees! But, sirrah, there's no room for faith,
Enter Hostess
To punish this offence in other faults:
through and through, my sword hacked like a
So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men,
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster:
What letters hast thou there?--I can but thank you.
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
instinct hadst thou for it?
nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. 'The
The unyoked humour of your idleness:
How now, wool-sack! what mutter you?
Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith:
By some, that know not why he is away,
move and what he hears may be believed, that the
Because some tell me that thou art a king.
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm,
It is, my lord.
We were the first and dearest of your friends.
I must not have you henceforth question me
o'clock in the afternoon.
As is the difference betwixt day and night
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.
ta'en a thousand pound this day morning.
Of my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up:
As, sick and blunted with community,
Slept in his face and render'd such aspect
Did I, Bardolph?
devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh
Why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink,
of travellers.
thy hand to laugh a little.
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
A plague of all cowards, still say I.
horses, by our habits and by every other
Here comes your cousin.
Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Marry,
The hearts of all that he did angle for,
So tell your cousin, and bring me word
Rare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come!
Lord Stafford's death.
For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven
Exeunt Sheriff and Carrier
bacons, on! What, ye knaves! young men must live.
How the rogue roar'd!
Thou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt have
Had still kept loyal to possession
Baited like eagles having lately bathed,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.
I'll have the current in this place damm'd up,
Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?
The king himself in person is set forth,
that I utterly deny. If sack and sugar be a fault,
'how many hast thou killed to-day?' 'Give my roan
I do.
was never lost in my house before.
such enemies again as that fiend Douglas, that
But now two paces of the vilest earth
That he shall render every glory up,
See riot and dishonour stain the brow
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
The lives of those that he did lead to fight
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now.
will sully: in Barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much.
the hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.
house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.
Farewell, and stand fast.
Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS
We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns,
My lord, do you see these meteors? do you behold
I'll none of it. Honour is a mere scutcheon: and so
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
Till he hath found a time to pay us home:
In deputation left behind him here,
forty pound apiece, and a seal-ring of my
I would it had been of horse. Where shall I find
And at the time of my departure thence
Go to the king, and let there be impawn'd
Enter Sheriff and the Carrier
Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch,
Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
Ay, four, in buckram suits.
But, as the devil would have it, three misbegotten
SCENE I. Bangor. The Archdeacon's house.
Here is a dear, a true industrious friend,
he loves our house. Let me see some more. 'The
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
Sir John Bracy from your father, you must to the
me on. Yea, but how if honour prick me off when I
SCENE I. Rochester. An inn yard.
Hie, good Sir Michael, bear this sealed brief
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit
but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye and a
humour as well as waiting in the court, I can tell
ran away upon instinct, you will not touch the true
time, but also how thou art accompanied: for though
arrant cowards, there's no equity stirring: there's
Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,
Let me not understand you, then, speak it in Welsh.
Dies
Seven? why, there were but four even now.
call him forth.
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
Exit GLENDOWER
A clip-wing'd griffin and a moulten raven,
They fight. KING HENRY being in danger, PRINCE HENRY enters
The Archbishop's grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
And of a dragon and a finless fish,
Answer'd neglectingly I know not what,
not where. If I travel but four foot by the squier
for mercy and still run and roared, as ever I heard
And hold their level with thy princely heart?
Good morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?
Anon, anon, sir. Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.
Let each man do his best: and here draw I
O Jesu, I have heard the prince tell him, I know not
to-morrow. 'Sblood,'twas time to counterfeit, or
They tell thee true.
Of vapours that did seem to strangle him.
Send danger from the east unto the west,
O, I am ignorance itself in this!
God help the wicked! if to be old and merry be a
'Sblood, I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot
In quantity equals not one of yours:
Cousin, of many men
It pleased your majesty to turn your looks
He cannot come, my lord, he is grievous sick.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
shall be honourable. I'll procure this fat rogue a
Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,
Enter DOUGLAS
Thy stomach, pleasure and thy golden sleep?
Too indirect for long continuance.
Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
Francis!
And our induction full of prosperous hope.
And not the very king. I have two boys
You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
No, that's certain, I am not a double man: but if I
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
I lie, for they pray continually to their saint, the
Upon my head?
Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we
And yet, in faith, thou bear'st thee like a king:
partly thy mother's word, partly my own opinion,
In single opposition, hand to hand,
Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down?
And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed:
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
I'll follow, as they say, for reward. He that
companies, slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word,
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current that
Villains!
woes also: and yet there is a virtuous man whom I
A noble earl and many a creature else
To chase these pagans in those holy fields
Poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oats
And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirs
these rebels, they offend none but the virtuous: I
SCENE I. The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.
capons and clocks the tongues of bawds and dials the
Enter another Messenger
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
O monstrous! but one half-penny-worth of bread to
Good morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse?
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?
Exeunt
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
No, on the barren mountains let him starve,
Try fortune with him in a single fight.
You have good leave to leave us: when we need
Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers,
I do, I pray God my girdle break.
Falstaff, that old white-bearded Satan.
Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll be
Herein misled by your suggestion.
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
come in my way, so: if he do not, if I come in his
could not be else: I have drunk medicines. Poins!
a hair, and I'll be sworn my pocket was picked. Go
I will do so.
of pewter. But, Francis, darest thou be so valiant
Send him to answer thee, or any man,
Embowell'd will I see thee by and by:
Will you give me money, captain?
And I am glad of it with all my heart:
He does, he does: we'll be revenged on him.
Let us not leave till all our own be won.
Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs
ago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever since
Peto, so did you, Bardolph: you are lions too, you
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
Gelding the opposed continent as much
thy Harry's company, banish not him thy Harry's
That I will, by to-morrow dinner-time,
Dost thou hear, Hal? thou knowest in the state of
bawdy-house, they pick pockets.
not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter,
'But for mine own part, my lord, I could be well
blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream,
Of guns and drums and wounds,--God save the mark!--
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh,
By Richard that dead is the next of blood?
friends, and full of expectation, an excellent plot,
It was myself, my brother and his son,
The very list, the very utmost bound
swear truth out of England but he would make you
is there not besides the Douglas? have I not all
to-morrow: I have a jest to execute that I cannot
Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER
as ancient writers do report, doth defile, so doth
grey iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity in
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
grows old: God help the while! a bad world, I say.
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.
in the stable.
bladder. There's villanous news abroad: here was
Whew! A plague upon you all! Give me my horse, you
spirit Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thou
What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?
liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and
The trumpets sound. Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE  HENRY, LORD JOHN LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, with WORCESTER and VERNON prisoners
He throws the bottle at him. Exit
And made us doff our easy robes of peace,
Shall I? content: this chair shall be my state,
thy quiddities? what a plague have I to do with a
But soft, I pray you, did King Richard then
You stand against anointed majesty.
Money and order for their furniture.
This is his uncle's teaching, this is Worcester,
lion, and thou for a true prince. But, by the Lord,
What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile:
foot-land rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers,
Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners,
SCENE III. London. The palace.
together and thrown over the shoulders like an
My father and Glendower being both away,
lord of the council rated me the other day in the
No, I'll none of it: I pray thee keep that for the
O Lord, sir, who do you mean?
Faith, Sir John,'tis more than time that I were
I warrant you, that man is not alive
I told him gently of our grievances,
liking, I shall be out of heart shortly, and then I
And in the neck of that, task'd the whole state:
No I'll be sworn, unless you call three fingers on
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours,
pupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight.
My lord.--
On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward,
Which thou pour'st down from these swelling heavens
let them coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks:
gurnet. I have misused the king's press damnably.
As ever offer'd foul play in the state.
And here I stand: judge, my masters.
Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him,
He was much fear'd by his physicians.
I smell it: upon my life, it will do well.
'Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be red-breast
He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
Exit Peto
My prisoners in your majesty's behalf.
this! Why, my lord of York commends the plot and the
They take it already upon their salvation, that
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
them and foot them too. A plague of all cowards!
Exit
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
SCENE IV. The Boar's-Head Tavern, Eastcheap.
I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too
of courtesy, and tell me flatly I am no proud Jack,
Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,'
hear me speak but this.
You will, chops?
compass, Sir John.
And that's the dearest grace it renders you,--
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
Come, shelter, shelter: I have removed Falstaff's
The lady speaks in Welsh
Hear ye, Yedward, if I tarry at home and go not,
SCENE I. KING HENRY IV's camp near Shrewsbury.
He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout:
What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thou
Not a whit.
By telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil.
should be lewdly given, he deceiveth me, for, Harry,
By still dispraising praise valued in you,
an old faced ancient: and such have I, to fill up
And you have found me, for accordingly
where to have her.
What trick, what device, what starting-hole, canst
I hold as little counsel with weak fear
Exeunt LANCASTER and WESTMORELAND
had never been born.
Now, sirs: by'r lady, you fought fair, so did you,
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
My lord, prepare, the king comes on apace.
majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by
younger brothers, revolted tapsters and ostlers
Their points being broken,--
Why, Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead.
Here.
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
I will not send them: I will after straight
How bloodily the sun begins to peer
Myself of many I am charged withal:
Until I meet the king.
The land is burning, Percy stands on high,
Why, thou owest God a death.
As full of spirit as the month of May,
strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner than
I would your grace would take me with you: whom
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
darkness. When thou rannest up Gadshill in the
Stabbing him
Enter SIR WALTER BLUNT
and a good jest for ever.
But who comes here?
hadst been an ignis fatuus or a ball of wildfire,
And when I urged the ransom once again
The hope and expectation of thy time
And violation of all faith and troth
O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!
The king with mighty and quick-raised power
it over: by the Lord, and I do not, I am a villain:
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
Exit Vintner
Content.
That this same child of honour and renown,
But, soft! whom have we here?
Should go so general current through the world.
shall have good trading that way. But tell me, Hal,
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see
Exceedingly well read, and profited
He should or he should not, for he made me mad
To thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy?
of me? shall I not take mine case in mine inn but I
Soon kindled and soon burnt, carded his state,
you, four and twenty pound.
Without our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st.
Why say you so? looks he not for supply?
My lord, I pray you, hear me.
Edmund Mortimer, My lord of York and Owen Glendower?
to the king's exchequer.
Arm, gentlemen, to arms! for I have thrown
Find pardon on my true submission.
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.
O, I do not like that paying back, 'tis a double labour.
Ill-spirited Worcester! did not we send grace,
cloak-bag of guts, that roasted Manningtree ox with
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
What talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang,
And, his corruption being ta'en from us,
The better part of ours are full of rest.
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,
is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?
the hill, we'll walk afoot awhile, and ease our legs.
Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Defect of manners, want of government,
SCENE II. London. An apartment of the Prince's.
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh.
forgotten what the inside of a church is made of, I
Do, my lord.
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
company: banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.
And so there is: but yet the king hath drawn
Therefore make haste. I must go write again
This honourable bounty shall belong:
She will, she will, justice hath liquored her. We
A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire,
But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes.
Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:
Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.
I do, I will.
I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along,
That brought you home and boldly did outdare
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
The skipping king, he ambled up and down
Enter HOTSPUR, solus, reading a letter
To fight against me under Percy's pay,
Owen, Owen, the same, and his son-in-law Mortimer,
O Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile.
doublet, four through the hose, my buckler cut
Re-enter POINS
most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand' to
my lieutenant Peto meet me at town's end.
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
As you yourself have forged against yourself
The trumpet sounds retreat, the day is ours.
Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded,
Above yon busky hill! the day looks pale
lad, how is that answered?
lend me thy sword.
garters! If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this. An I
No, Sir John, You do not know me, Sir John. I know
More active-valiant or more valiant-young,
Till I have learned thy language, for thy tongue
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer,
I cannot blame him: at my nativity
but in all things? wherein worthy, but in nothing?
Exeunt
In general, journey-bated and brought low:
What may the king's whole battle reach unto?
Exit Servant
My lord, here are letters for you.
And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it,
Against acquaintance, kindred and allies:
That not a horse is half the half of himself.
That's even as fair as--at hand, quoth the
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
To North
May turn the tide of fearful faction
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor
the shot here, here's no scoring but upon the pate.
SCENE III. The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
Than I by letters shall direct your course.
The king should keep his word in loving us,
Enter LADY PERCY
SCENE IV. York. The ARCHBISHOP'S palace.
This is not well, my lord, this is not well.
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
Making you ever better than his praise
It appears so by the story.
match. O, if men were to be saved by merit, what
frailty. You confess then, you picked my pocket?
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Coventry with them, that's flat: nay, and the
Re-enter BARDOLPH, running
And all the courses of my life do show
'Tis catching hither, even to our camp.
Exeunt
as to play the coward with thy indenture and show it
Good morrow, Ned.
Indeed, you come near me now, Hal, for we that take
Indeed his king, to be engaged in Wales,
fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and
and hear the lady sing in Welsh.
gentleman: they will along with company, for they
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
For all the world
Your tenants, friends and neighbouring gentlemen.
when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons,
The hour before the heavenly-harness'd team
The better cherish'd, still the nearer death.
Enter a Messenger with letters
be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy:
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help:
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
They wound my thoughts worse than sword my flesh:
As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon  them, they all run away, and Falstaff, after a blow or two, runs away too, leaving the booty behind them
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
Others would say 'Where, which is Bolingbroke?'
Imagination of some great exploit
Where is it! taken from us it is: a hundred upon
The tongues of soothers, but a braver place
To entertain the lag-end of my life
To end the one of us, and would to God
Francis!
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:
not thou, when thou art king, hang a thief.
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
innocency Adam fell, and what should poor Jack
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.
May reasonably die and never rise
Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me,
I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty
As what I think might be, but what I know
need to be, virtuous enough, swore little, diced not
there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of an
To thirty thousand.
Do you not love me? do you not, indeed?
Call in the sheriff.
I rather of his absence make this use:
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
Exit POINS
thou wilt have none,--
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what,
I cannot read them now.
it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the
Thou sayest well, and it holds well too, for the
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
The crest of youth against your dignity.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
It rain'd down fortune showering on your head,
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
No, no, they were not bound.
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not, Percy,
Make me believe that thou art only mark'd
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John,
foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the
What say'st thou, my lady?
And all the budding honours on thy crest
Begins his golden progress in the east.
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home.
ancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen of
as secure as sleep. If you will go, I will stuff
My liege, I did deny no prisoners.
the company thou keepest: for, Harry, now I do not
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!
You do not counsel well:
Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass to
Good night, my noble lord.
pitiful-hearted Titan, that melted at the sweet tale
means your grace?
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the king
Of all the court and princes of my blood:
not such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath: give me
O gentlemen, the time of life is short!
Of his great name and estimation,
And bid it pass?
Exit Bardolph
Who, ne'er so tame, so cherish'd and lock'd up,
that, and for their bareness, I am sure they never
content to do the profession some grace, that would,
Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal
foolish-hanging of thy nether lip, that doth warrant
All plumed like estridges that with the wind
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
hate us youth: down with them: fleece them.
I would the state of time had first been whole
This absence of your father's draws a curtain,
The lady speaks again in Welsh
So, when this loose behavior I throw off
His health was never better worth than now.
setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
My shames redoubled! for the time will come,
were enriched with any other injuries but these, I
good compass: and now I live out of all order, out
And I must know it, else he loves me not.
And military title capital
Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,--
Whither I must, I must, and, to conclude,
Revolted Mortimer!
And on my face he turn'd an eye of death,
let him tell the king: we are prepared. I will set
Peace, ye fat-guts! lie down, lay thine ear close
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd,
Proclaim'd at market-crosses, read in churches,
Such water-colours to impaint his cause,
a million: thou owest me thy love.
Thou art the king of honour:
Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.
Stand close, I hear them coming.
Well, here I am set.
company, and the half shirt is two napkins tacked
that he shall go.
without seeming so.
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir
Shall be my friend again and I'll be his:
Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
And that it was great pity, so it was,
Why, that will I.
learned that of me.
Of hurlyburly innovation:
ACT I
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer,
I am good friends with my father and may do any thing.
Well said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find no
cheerful look, a pleasing eye and a most noble
I'll not have it alter'd.
at the door: shall I let them in?
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.
And curbs himself even of his natural scope
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
to the ground and list if thou canst hear the tread
tailor's-yard, you sheath, you bowcase, you vile
Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, and DOUGLAS
All! I know not what you call all, but if I fought
Why, there is it: come sing me a bawdy song, make
The powers of us may serve so great a day
For you my staff of office did I break
tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.
Nay, that's past praying for: I have peppered two
infidel! Ha! you shall see now in very sincerity
And is not this an honourable spoil?
his day. What need I be so forward with him that
their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis.
As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.
for you all, you have horses for yourselves:
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse:
and had my pocket picked: this house is turned
Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
SCENE II. London. The palace.
Enter FALSTAFF
'zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.
And make the Douglas' son your only mean
We licence your departure with your son.
Re-enter DOUGLAS, he fights with FALSTAFF,  who falls down as if he were dead, and exit DOUGLAS. HOTSPUR is wounded, and falls
contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear
Shaked like a coward.
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
I cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'd
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
A trifle, some eight-penny matter.
Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to you
Exeunt
As heart can think: there is not such a word
Ne'er seen but wonder'd at: and so my state,
Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas'
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,
At Holmedon met,
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news,
husband? I love him well, he is an honest man.
You say true:
How now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours.
Is room enough: this earth that bears thee dead
What yesternight our council did decree
Many an English ditty lovely well
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
fellow met me on the way and told me I had unloaded
this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads
A larger dare to our great enterprise,
Whose deaths are yet unrevenged: I prithee,
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
And see already how he doth begin
Say, what beast, thou knave, thou?
With all my heart.
What never-dying honour hath he got
countenance. Farewell: you shall find me in Eastcheap.
As fat as butter.
To be commenced in strands afar remote.
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
I will, my lord. There are two gentlemen
you a dozen of shirts to your back.
cowards! Let them speak: if they speak more or
The liberal and kind offer of the king.
There did he pause: but let me tell the world,
Up, and away!
Where is it, Jack? where is it?
So cowardly, and but for these vile guns,
To line his enterprise: but if you go,--
For more is to be said and to be done
ought him a thousand pound.
This head of safety, and withal to pry
To push against a kingdom, with his help
I give him his answer?
church! Company, villanous company, hath been the
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest,
of purses than giving direction doth from labouring,
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles
Enter the PRINCE OF WALES and FALSTAFF
Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?
Will you sit down?
Exeunt
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
The noble Westmoreland and warlike Blunt,
thou keep!
How show'd his tasking? seem'd it in contempt?
Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day,
I know you all, and will awhile uphold
poor four of us.
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
Thy maiden sword.
I am accursed to rob in that thief's company: the
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And so hath Clifton: I'll to Clifton straight.
Exeunt
thee, Hal, I knew nothing, and now am I, if a man
An otter, Sir John! Why an otter?
But that I think his father loves him not
for look you, Francis, your white canvas doublet
All studies here I solemnly defy,
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
As full of peril and adventurous spirit
Will this content you, Kate?
Tut, I came not to hear this.
leak in your chimney, and your chamber-lie breeds
skin hangs about me like an like an old lady's loose
By those Welshwomen done as may not be
And thus I win thee.
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Well, do not then, for since you love me not,
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes,
Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack
have often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.
Enter Chamberlain
deputy's wife of the ward to thee. Go, you thing,
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
For doing these fair rites of tenderness.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.
O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years
Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.
And pardon absolute for yourself and these
not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on
Content, and the argument shall be thy running away.
Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I:
gunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if he
I am too perfect in, and, but for shame,
Exit
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate,
How! the prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup: 'sblood, an
Are the indentures drawn? shall we be gone?
For I was train'd up in the English court,
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
valour bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll take
Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,
me, so, 'tis a point of friendship.
My father and my uncle and myself
swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. A mad
Heigh, heigh! the devil rides upon a fiddlestick:
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
o'clock, early at Gadshill! there are pilgrims going
could run as fast as thou canst. You are straight
But like a comet I was wonder'd at,
Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, ye
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
send him back again to my mother.
Where?
they are for the town's end, to beg during life.
Enter SIR RICHARD VERNON
England, I could find in my heart.
What, none?
every man to his business.
purchase, as I am a true man.
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
Now, Esperance! Percy! and set on.
whoreson, obscene, grease tallow-catch,--
My own knee! when I was about thy years, Hal, I was
And dress'd myself in such humility
Never to hold it up again! the spirits
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster,
Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb
ACT II
sugar-candy to make thee long-winded, if thy pocket
He did confound the best part of an hour
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot,
Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.
And that's a feeling disputation:
Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'st
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,
crown for a pitiful bald crown!
And not in fear of your nativity.
come on? how then? Can honour set to a leg? no: or
Exeunt
So many of his shadows thou hast met
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
Exit
he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not, and
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,
he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than
shall have no strength to repent. An I have not
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
No more, no more: worse than the sun in March,
Prophetically doth forethink thy fall.
Exit
fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may be
O, no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
That were his lackeys: I cried 'hum,' and 'well, go to,'
Without corrival, all her dignities:
sores, and such as indeed were never soldiers, but
With winged haste to the lord marshal,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
More than a little is by much too much.
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
sooner it wears. That thou art my son, I have
is so forward, and afoot too! I hate it.
Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
within these two hours, and so, come in when ye will.
wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give
I thank him, that he cuts me from my tale,
Exeunt all but PRINCE HENRY and FALSTAFF
But come yourself with speed to us again,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
Danger and disobedience in thine eye:
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
And here is my speech. Stand aside, nobility.
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
If all the year were playing holidays,
Item, Bread,        ob.
Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair,
Ned Poins and I will walk lower: if they 'scape
Or fill up chronicles in time to come,
his bargain, for he was never yet a breaker of
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent.
parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry is
His is certain, ours is doubtful.
Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sin
I guess their tenor.
I care not.
For I shall never hold that man my friend
Peace, cousin Percy, you will make him mad.
Enter another Carrier
O' horseback, ye cuckoo, but afoot he will not budge a foot.
And there is my Lord of Worcester and a head
What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?
Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.
though I be but the prince of Wales, yet I am king
Hot livers and cold purses.
What think you they portend?
And now, forsooth, takes on him to reform
forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be, the
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else,
your father.
Trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue,
services, that you would think that I had a hundred
To put him quite beside his patience.
My noble lord, from Eastcheap.
the camomile, the more it is trodden on the faster
dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning, got with
So he doth you, my lord, and said this other day you
the door: shall we be merry?
If die, brave death, when princes die with us!
When you come 'cross his humour, faith, he does:
So honour cross it from the north to south,
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.
For treason is but trusted like the fox,
My lord?
What is thy name, that in the battle thus
'Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sick
subjects afore thee like a flock of wild-geese,
Heir to the crown?
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
Anon, Francis? No, Francis, but to-morrow, Francis,
Hark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his pockets.
say in the behalf of that Falstaff.
Made to my father, while his blood was poor,
As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland,
I say the earth did shake when I was born.
the heels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare.
thou art altogether given over, and wert indeed, but
extremities he endured, and in the reproof of this
action? do I not bate? do I not dwindle? Why my
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales:
ACT III
You took occasion to be quickly woo'd
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
How long is't ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
blackberries? a question not to be asked. Shall
A son who is the theme of honour's tongue,
Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped
like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a
Now, by my sceptre and my soul to boot,
Let them alone awhile, and then open the door.
The scourge of greatness to be used on it,
I would I were a weaver, I could sing psalms or any
the rooms of them that have bought out their
Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms:
No, nor you shall not.
wherein crafty, but in villany? wherein villanous,
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
of them, two I am sure I have paid, two rogues
I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks
Neither,'tis a woman's fault.
And uncle Worcester: a plague upon it!
thou art king? and resolution thus fobbed as it is
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
Let's see what they be: read them.
I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse,
And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!'
age of two and twenty or thereabouts! I am
'Faith, and so we should,
Come, brother John, full bravely hast thou flesh'd
The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,
for running!
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
but as thou art prince, I fear thee as I fear the
Wouldst thou have thy head broken?
And gave his countenance, against his name,
And then the power of Scotland and of York,
Cousin, farewell: no further go in this
--Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forth
God-a-mercy! so should I be sure to be heart-burned.
Why, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he would
horse a drench,' says he, and answers 'Some
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
But yet a woman: and for secrecy,
Scots, Douglas, that runs o' horseback up a hill
I understand thy looks: that pretty Welsh
the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible.
What, stand'st thou idle here? lend me thy sword:
An old man.
But is a-weary of thy common sight,
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto.
I have forgot the map.
gavest me,'twas a pennyworth, wast't not?
I may, for some things true, wherein my youth
The archdeacon hath divided it
He made a blushing cital of himself,
With the best blood that I can meet withal
England did never owe so sweet a hope,
No lady closer, for I well believe
On Thursday we ourselves will march: our meeting
rewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great,
Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not
Dost thou hear, Hal? never call a true piece of
not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
He durst as well have met the devil alone
That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.
My presence, like a robe pontifical,
When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.
and old Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot of
Swearest thou, ungracious boy? henceforth ne'er look
Yes, Jack, upon instinct.
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes,
and fifty tattered prodigals lately come from
Exeunt carriers
Stain'd with the variation of each soil
thou never leave calling 'Francis,' that his tale
and I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it
Letters from him! why comes he not himself?
And left me in reputeless banishment,
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
fleas like a loach.
As both of you--God pardon it!--have done,
Give it to me: what, is it in the case?
Which I shall send you written, be assured,
Takes up HOTSPUR on his back
I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure
not with fifty of them, I am a bunch of radish: if
Hotspur of the north, he that kills me some six or
Exit Poins
I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear,
Now God help thee!
'Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul
And those musicians that shall play to you
I'll be no longer guilty of this sin, this sanguine
He calls us rebels, traitors, and will scourge
'Faith, and I'll send him packing.
Who, I? no, I defy thee: God's light, I was never
humours since the old days of goodman Adam to the
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself:
We are impressed and engaged to fight,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.
Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say
So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
Good morrow, good my lord.
An if we live, we live to tread on kings,
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
My lord, old Sir John, with half-a-dozen more, are
If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne
For some displeasing service I have done,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,
For obtaining of suits?
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
And further, I have learn'd,
Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester: I have bespoke
How! so far?
on me. Thou art violently carried away from grace:
That, when he please again to be himself,
Not a whit, i' faith, I lack some of thy instinct.
Well, we leave that to the proof.
never spake other English in his life than 'Eight
Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.
But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come,
I did never see such pitiful rascals.
Exit PRINCE HENRY
killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I?
That, being daily swallow'd by men's eyes,
O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
Here they rob them and bind them. Exeunt
This, in the name of God, I promise here:
You are Grand-jurors, are ye? we'll jure ye, 'faith.
The other night I fell asleep here behind the arras
Throwing the body down
If we without his help can make a head
Doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale and with
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him:
[Within]  Francis!
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
No, Mortimer is not there.
And either we or they must lower lie.
their services, and now my whole charge consists of
And food for--
Exeunt
much honour, that thou wert not with me in this sweet
See how this river comes me cranking in,
lead, and as heavy too: God keep lead out of me! I
Into three limits very equally:
By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal, 'tis no sin for a
I'll have it so: a little charge will do it.
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
To tell you once again that at my birth
shall have my pocket picked? I have lost a
Who is, if every owner were well placed,
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
You start away
cunning match have you made with this jest of the
Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.
Will not you?
My lord, the man I know.
Ay, ay, he said four.
And God defend but still I should stand so,
Harry, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised
thou wilt. But, Francis!
four, and, with a word, out-faced you from your
Falstaff do in the days of villany? Thou seest I
And you in hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
apparent shame?
Brooks no division: it will be thought
Be more myself.
counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man:
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
should speak truly, little better than one of the
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
Our business valued, some twelve days hence
You rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there is
If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused
And an adopted name of privilege,
Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant?
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths,
leave them: and, sirrah, I have cases of buckram
Tut, tut, good enough to toss, food for powder, food
Nor could the noble Mortimer
court in the morning. That same mad fellow of the
Came from the north and thus it did import:
A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thy
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers, then,
love thy husband, look to thy servants, cherish thy
Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNON
'Sblood, I would my face were in your belly!
To-morrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
An if it do, take it for thy labour, and if it make
'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept,
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners.
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
Say, what thing? what thing?
Drag back our expedition: certain horse
Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet
Enter Servant
Out of my grief and my impatience,
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
thing. A plague of all cowards, I say still.
nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man:
Of pellmell havoc and confusion.
Gave him their heirs, as pages follow'd him
Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and him
Capitulate against us and are up.
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
prince. But, Hal, I prithee, trouble me no more
Those prisoners you shall keep.
True, who bears hard
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
and rebels' arms triumph in massacres!
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks,
There without ransom to lie forfeited,
In a new channel, fair and evenly,
Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt: there's honour
by'r lady, inclining to three score, and now I
And won by rareness such solemnity.
for powder, they'll fill a pit as well as better:
Well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thou
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Enter the PRINCE and WESTMORELAND
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
By the mass, lad, thou sayest true, it is like we
In any case, the offer of the king.
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come:
true prince may, for recreation sake, prove a false
you.
But I have sent for him to answer this,
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.
great oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land
Come, here's the map: shall we divide our right
Sir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.
good king's son.
the pudding in his belly, that reverend vice, that
street about you, sir, but I marked him not, and yet
they drink,
Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today,
march of twelve-score. The money shall be paid
I deny your major: if you will deny the sheriff,
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,
clerks, I'll give thee this neck.
drink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a
That you and I should meet upon such terms
Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'd
Than thou the shadow of succession,
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me,
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
Against renowned Douglas! whose high deeds,
'Sblood, you starveling, you elf-skin, you dried
How old art thou, Francis?
a true man.
My father gave him welcome to the shore,
Enter Vintner
And I say the earth was not of my mind,
I know not whether God will have it so,
beware instinct, the lion will not touch the true
And as wondrous affable and as bountiful
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland
which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear,
SCENE III. Warkworth castle
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer,
the blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eat
Stand!
pleasure but in passion, not in words only, but in
your house.' He could be contented: why is he not,
tale shall put you down. Then did we two set on you
seal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.
Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip.
ever chewed with a tooth. Eight yards of uneven
would be argument for a week, laughter for a month
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
As if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds,
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
And comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies,
Yea, if he said my ring was copper.
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
lads in Eastcheap. They call drinking deep, dyeing
Such barren pleasures, rude society,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,
have not ballads made on you all and sung to filthy
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
Of all our fortunes.
With strong and mighty preparation.
And moe corrivals and dear men
That even our love durst not come near your sight
Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion,
And that same greatness too which our own hands
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.
In short time after, he deposed the king,
And start so often when thou sit'st alone?
ends my catechism.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.
Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?
as well as another man, a plague on my bringing up!
our pleasure to fail, and then will they adventure
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a
upon the exploit themselves, which they shall have
there, and you too, but my powers are there already.
manage alone. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto and Gadshill
Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear
I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath
Enter KING HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, the EARL of WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and others
drunk me would have bought me lights as good cheap
action. But, sweet Ned,--to sweeten which name of
Bloodstained with these valiant combatants.
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
[Reads]  Item, A capon,. . 2s. 2d.
perfect image of life indeed. The better part of
And that no man might draw short breath today
What, is it a time to jest and dally now?
Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
These things indeed you have articulate,
never an eye in thy head? canst not hear? An
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence
to purse-taking.
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
torches, walking with thee in the night betwixt
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh
which thou hast often heard of and it is known to
Afford no extraordinary gaze,
Why, my horse, my love, my horse.
altogether governed by humours. Lie still, ye thief,
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'd
appointment, to be ourselves.
very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue is
long peace, ten times more dishonourable ragged than
I know thou dost.
at the dearest chandler's in Europe. I have
The number of the king exceedeth ours:
skim milk with so honourable an action! Hang him!
Well said, my noble Scot: if speaking truth
The trumpet sounds a parley
Whither I go, thither shall you go too,
The king, I can tell you, looks for us all: we must
at me, for it was so dark, Hal, that thou couldst
twenty years, and yet I am bewitched with the
To answer all the debt he owes to you
tell us when we meet at supper: how thirty, at
Well, for two of them, I know them to be as
To smother up his beauty from the world,
We will not now be troubled with reply:
bolting-hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcel
Another king! they grow like Hydra's heads:
He drinks
And being fed by us you used us so
it grows, yet youth, the more it is wasted the
The king hath many marching in his coats.
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood,
But I will never be a truant, love,
I'll keep them all,
Dives that lived in purple, for there he is in his
Jack, meet me to-morrow in the temple hall at two
This sword hath ended him: so shall it thee,
Laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths,
Enter HOTSPUR
On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took
Re-enter the Hostess
and so was he: but we rose both at an instant and
a fair hot wench in flame-coloured taffeta, I see no
Then are we all undone.
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd
thieves of the day's beauty: let us be Diana's
I could have better spared a better man:
discarded unjust serving-men, younger sons to
And furious close of civil butchery
But not the form of what he should attend.
These letters come from your father.
I should not make so dear a show of zeal:
let him sleep till day. I'll to the court in the
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
To wage an instant trial with the king.
Like a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a king
not an eagle's talon in the waist, I could have
of fern-seed, we walk invisible.
Speak, sirs, how was it?
Shall I return this answer to the king?
By this our book is drawn, we'll but seal,
You tread upon my patience: but be sure
There is more news:
calls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter, honour pricks
Cousin, I think thou art enamoured
Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine
All furnish'd, all in arms,
PRINCE HENRY draws it out, and finds it to be a bottle of sack
No, I'll be sworn, I make as good use of it as many
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you
I answer'd indirectly, as I said,
heinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked for
I am not in the roll of common men.
'Sblood, my lord, they are false: nay, I'll tickle
Christendom.
I pray thee, lend me thine.
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
Peace, chewet, peace!
And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
They fight. DOUGLAS kills SIR WALTER BLUNT. Enter HOTSPUR
Prithee, do, Jack.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter PRINCE HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, and EARL OF WESTMORELAND
I told you yesternight: there's a franklin in the
of good fellowship come to you! What, shall we be
What, ho!
With some fine colour that may please the eye
gown, I am withered like an old apple-john. Well,
Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
back: call you that backing of your friends? A
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament,
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
The frame and huge foundation of the earth
Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Ned, where are our disguises?
What, upon compulsion? 'Zounds, an I were at the
There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good
The trumpet sounds
To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you.
live cleanly as a nobleman should do.
What's the matter?
carriage, and, as I think, his age some fifty, or,
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood,--
painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked his
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
Is Bridgenorth: and, Harry, you shall march
'as true as I live,' and 'as God shall mend me,' and
How shall we part with them in setting forth?
Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.
They surfeited with honey and began
Before not dreamt of.
money of the king's coming down the hill, 'tis going
The archbishop.
He searcheth his pockets, and findeth certain papers
think I'll fear thee as I fear thy father? nay, an
drink, but I tell you, my lord fool, out of this
And in my conduct shall your ladies come,
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer:
I have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger,
There's enough to make us all.
Forget your oath to us at Doncaster,
thee. Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the
The circumstance consider'd, good my lord,
O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me!
How now, my Lord of Worcester! 'tis not well
And God befriend us, as our cause is just!
Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, MORTIMER, and GLENDOWER
christen could be better bit than I have been since
When the intent of bearing them is just.
An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
compulsion, I.
O, pardon me that I descend so low,
It lends a lustre and more great opinion,
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Forty let it be:
That wished him on the barren mountains starve.
Beguiling them of commendation.
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
In such a rustling time? Who leads his power?
Some surety for a safe return again,
Enter a Messenger
God pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry,
royal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.
Enlarged him and made a friend of him,
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
Then let not him be slander'd with revolt.
Over his country's wrongs, and by this face,
wag, shall there be gallows standing in England when
And such a flood of greatness fell on you,
and a cold capon's leg?
soldest him on Good-Friday last for a cup of Madeira
I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.
Our grandam earth, having this distemperature,
Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the
I grant ye, upon instinct. Well, he is there too,
As, in reproof of many tales devised,
Though I could 'scape shot-free at London, I fear
No, if rightly taken, halter.
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon
When that this body did contain a spirit,
me?
a fair pair of heels and run from it?
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
hath seen such scarecrows. I'll not march through
And will, to save the blood on either side,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel:
Ay, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quoth
gyves on, for indeed I had the most of them out of
a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy's mind, the
in buckram that I told thee of--
A sword, whose temper I intend to stain
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse.
Come, come it nay not be. I wonder much,
Those same noble Scots
time and oft.
called so in mine own house before.
with vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where a
In passion shook.
yourself and I will not be there, and when they
And would be glad he met with some mischance,
trade-fallen, the cankers of a calm world and a
are to be loved. No, my good lord, banish Peto,
Come, you shall have Trent turn'd.
To-night, say I.
Know then, my name is Douglas,
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Proceeded further, cut me off the heads
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
John, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money lent
Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.
incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will
He drinks
And the contrarious winds that held the king
not see thy hand.
hands, and says to his wife 'Fie upon this quiet
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
steal as in a castle, cocksure, we have the receipt
Exeunt
Ill not pay a denier. What, will you make a younker
truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine, it is all
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,
Which of us fears.
How long hast thou to serve, Francis?
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
So long in his unlucky Irish wars
His letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.
As all the poisonous potions in the world
shotten herring. There live not three good men
And that would set my teeth nothing on edge,
And they shall do their office. So, be gone,
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
All his offences live upon my head
Come, neighbour: the boy shall lead our horses down
keep close, we'll read it at more advantage: there
Well, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him. If he do
For by that name as oft as Lancaster
Swore him assistance and perform'd it too.
'Zounds, will they not rob us?
Then to the point.
by Phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.' And,
Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
O, the father, how he holds his countenance!
thou alive?
O, my lord, my lord! the sheriff with a most
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point
He will suspect us still and find a time
O Jesu, my lord the prince!
point. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me--
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride:
No, thou shalt.
Nay, task me to my word, approve me, lord.
Farewell, thou latter spring! farewell, All-hallown summer!
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not
Nothing but papers, my lord.
above seven times a week, went to a bawdy-house once
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
I would you would accept of grace and love.
rogue's company. If the rascal hath not given me
Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As thou art match'd withal and grafted to,
The moody frontier of a servant brow.
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
it hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,
There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive
Alarum. Enter FALSTAFF, solus
Thou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeed
But stand against us like an enemy.
miracle. I am eight times thrust through the
Away,
Want mercy, if I do not join with him:
This present enterprise set off his head,
there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old
A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too!
of bastard in the Half-Moon,' or so. But, Ned, to
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us
I am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with a
monstrous watch is at the door.
Exit PRINCE HENRY
Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
And all the currents of a heady fight.
But yet I would your father had been here.
Malevolent to you in all aspects,
brother John, this to my Lord of Westmoreland.
I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.
What! he did not?
He spieth FALSTAFF on the ground
now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder
most resolutely snatched on Monday night and most
This, Douglas? no: I know this face full well:
otherwise.
Weep not, sweet queen, for trickling tears are vain.
Enfeoff'd himself to popularity,
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
general course of action. 'Zounds, an I were now by
So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Is with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'd
no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them.
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
He question'd me, amongst the rest, demanded
Is to come in:
'Twere best he did.
What men?
scarlet, and when you breathe in your watering, they
Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant,
His uncle York, where I first bow'd my knee
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Why, she's neither fish nor flesh, a man knows not
On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these?
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence.
least, he fought with, what wards, what blows, what
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down
boy's play here, I can tell you.
thigh: if the man were alive and would deny it,
Such attribution should the Douglas have,
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt,
So do we.
My father, in kind heart and pity moved,
life: which if I can save, so, if not, honour comes
To sport would be as tedious as to work,
make my eyes look red, that it may be thought I have
coward on instinct. I shall think the better of
There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed
A virtue that was never seen in you.
A knocking heard
He is, my lord, an hour ago.
With vile participation: not an eye
your purses full of crowns, if you will not, tarry
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!
Wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.
Of any prince so wild a libertine.
'scape hanging for killing that rogue. I have
not my sword, but take my pistol, if thou wilt.
thou hast blushed extempore. Thou hadst fire and
I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?
He hath more worthy interest to the state
It may not be.
this intolerable deal of sack! What there is else,
In Richard's time,--what do you call the place?--
And yet, in faith, it is not, his present want
Seems more than we shall find it: were it good
But now, I do respect thee as my soul.
believe it was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like.
Envy your great deservings and good name,
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
I was a man: all would not do. A plague of all
How now, blown Jack! how now, quilt!
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms
there's no purchase in money. O, thou art a
were to say more than I know. That he is old, the
Exeunt
done this day. I have paid Percy, I have made him sure.
art not thou horrible afeard? thou being
Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back:
What manner of man is he?
thou now find out to hide thee from this open and
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
But to my charge. The king hath sent to know
given to virtue, I would swear by thy face, my oath
die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood, be
And lend no ear unto my purposes.
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
A business that this night may execute,
Which by thy younger brother is supplied,
I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd,
Now, Harry, whence come you?
dozen of them two hours together. I have 'scaped by
Meeting the cheque of such another day:
O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth,
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
Because the king is certainly possess'd
Enter WORCESTER and VERNON
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
She is desperate here, a peevish self-wind harlotry,
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
I'll grow less, for I'll purge, and leave sack, and
This curlish knot of all-abhorred war?
Of such an ungrown warrior.
smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch,--
My daughter weeps: she will not part with you,
Worcester is stolen away to-night, thy father's
That with our small conjunction we should on,
And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myself
particulars of my life.
Of every beardless vain comparative,
This seeming brow of justice, did he win
Anon, anon, sir.
With many holiday and lady terms
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Grew a companion to the common streets,
bakers' wives, and they have made bolters of them.
Exeunt
before day. An the Prince and Poins be not two
In reckoning up the several devils' names
But by the chance of war, to prove that true
lying! I grant you I was down and out of breath,
Here they both call him, the drawer stands amazed, not knowing which way to go
Of estimation and command in arms.
Depose me? if thou dost it half so gravely, so
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep.
Some of us love you well, and even those some
ah! whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! they
For there will be a world of water shed
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark ye, what
You were about to speak.
A very valiant rebel of the name.
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
In any summer-house in Christendom.
SCENE II. A public road near Coventry.
Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at
A thousand pound, Ha! a million: thy love is worth
of the sun's! if thou didst, then behold that compound.
prison. There's but a shirt and a half in all my
Why, hear you, my masters: was it for me to kill the
As on the other side it takes from you.
According to our threefold order ta'en?
For he that brought them, in the very heat
Enter GADSHILL
When but in all I was six thousand strong
As I am sick with working of my thoughts.
Success unto our valiant general,
She is a woman, therefore to be won.
Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.
Spare for no faggots, let there be enow:
More than three hours the fight continued,
I must go victual Orleans forthwith.
Your grace may starve perhaps before that time.
Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him,
And banding themselves in contrary parts
Discourse, I prithee, on this turret's top.
And hemm'd about with grim destruction:
And therefore are we certainly resolved
Come, come, 'tis only I that must disgrace thee.
SCENE III. The plains near Rouen.
Hark ye, not so: in witness, take ye that.
Nestor-like aged in an age of care,
Upon the which, that every one may read,
King Henry's peers and chief nobility
Especially for those occasions
O no, he lives, but is took prisoner,
Enter Scout
Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.
For there young Henry with his nobles lie.
your several dwelling-places, and not to wear,
Now, quiet soul, depart when heaven please,
Dogs! cowards! dastards! I would ne'er have fled,
You are disputing of your generals:
Exeunt, severally, GLOUCESTER and BISHOP OF WINCHESTER with their Serving-men
I vow'd, base knight, when I did meet thee next,
Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father's care,
First, let me tell you whom you have condemn'd:
RICHARD
Let not your private discord keep away
Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me:
Where is the best and safest passage in?
Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, REIGNIER, and others
But I'll unto his majesty, and crave
And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul!
Sir Thomas Gargrave, and Sir William Glansdale,
And suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace,
And interchanging blows I quickly shed
Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,
After this golden day of victory.
See, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner!
Alarum: excursions, wherein JOHN TALBOT is hemmed about, and TALBOT rescues him
Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
That hath contrived this woful tragedy!
The emperor and the Earl of Armagnac?
[Aside]  Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,
There were so many, whom she may accuse.
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.
Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our wars
But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
Father, I warrant you, take you no care,
Retreat: excursions. JOAN LA PUCELLE, ALENCON, and CHARLES fly
Decrepit miser! base ignoble wretch!
Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array.
RICHARD
By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure:
Behold, this is the happy wedding torch
Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a witch,
The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply,
Beside, what infamy will there arise,
Leaving no heir begotten of his body--
And in his bosom spend my latter gasp:
And leave my followers here to fight and die?
We will not fly, but to our enemies' throats.
and view the Frenchmen how they fortify:
You judge it straight a thing impossible
RICHARD
To view the artillery and munition,
Of bold-faced victory. Then leaden age,
Dead March. Enter the Funeral of KING HENRY the  Fifth, attended on by Dukes of BEDFORD, Regent of  France, GLOUCESTER, Protector, and EXETER, Earl of WARWICK, the BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, Heralds,  and c
I'll use to carry thee out of this place.
Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,
For they are certain and unfallible.
Being but fourth of that heroic line.
And of such great authority in France
This day, in argument upon a case,
Her mother liveth yet, can testify
Now, Salisbury, for thee, and for the right
As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.
These eyes, that see thee now well coloured,
Faint-hearted Woodvile, prizest him 'fore me?
These are the city gates, the gates of Rouen,
And you, my lords, remember where we are,
Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say,
To do my duty to my sovereign:
Thus contumeliously should break the peace!
RICHARD
Belike your lordship takes us then for fools,
There goes the Talbot, with his colours spread,
See the coast clear'd, and then we will depart.
Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull,
Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight:
Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the pope.
Here's Gloucester, a foe to citizens,
Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.
The first-begotten and the lawful heir,
Thus, while the vulture of sedition
Then swear allegiance to his majesty,
Of base insinuating flattery
Speak unto Talbot, nay, look up to him.
A virgin and his servant, say to him.
That hath so long been resident in France?
Going
Here an alarum, and it thunders and lightens
The ireful bastard Orleans, that drew blood
Our nation's terror and their bloody scourge!
'Twas full of darnel, do you like the taste?
Exit
My Lord of York, I promise you, the king
This sudden mischief never could have fall'n.
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!
Otherwhiles the famish'd English, like pale ghosts,
Which I have done, because unworthily
This fellow here, with envious carping tongue,
Repeat their semblance often on the seas,
Fly, to revenge my death, if I be slain.
After that things are set in order here,
Great Earl of Washford, Waterford and Valence,
That thus delays my promised supply
Within their chiefest temple I'll erect
I know not where I am, nor what I do,
Nor any of his false confederates.
SCENE VI. A field of battle.
And for that cause I trained thee to my house.
Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.
And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?
What she says I'll confirm: we'll fight it out.
Tut, holy Joan was his defensive guard.
Is this the Talbot, so much fear'd abroad
And as my duty springs, so perish they
I am vanquished, these haughty words of hers
By treason, falsehood and by treachery,
Now heaven forfend! the holy maid with child!
The greatest miracle that e'er ye wrought:
Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, I'll die with thee!
Finding his usurpation most unjust,
The Duke of Alencon flieth to his side.
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.
Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Urchinfield,
His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood,
Peel'd priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?
Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.
Will ye, like soldiers, come and fight it out?
And what I do imagine let that rest.
And for dissension, who preferreth peace
Reads
That you elect no other king but him,
Thou art my heir, the rest I wish thee gather:
Exit
We had not been thus shamefully surprised.
Not rascal-like, to fall down with a pinch,
Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him,
They had such courage and audacity?
Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?
To tear the garter from thy craven's leg,
Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words,
And, whereas I was black and swart before,
Alarum. Exeunt
And pithless arms, like to a wither'd vine
Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake!
Nay, let it rest where it began at first.
Fortune in favour makes him lag behind.
Either to be restored to my blood,
COUNTESS
So clear, so shining and so evident
And this is mine: sweet Henry, favour him.
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king,
Because till now we never saw your face:
And now declare, sweet stem from York's great stock,
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
An alarum. Re-enter TALBOT, BURGUNDY, and the rest
The outward composition of his body.
And for his safety there I'll best devise.
Here, there, and every where, enraged he flew:
Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood.
Having all day caroused and banqueted:
And hell too strong for me to buckle with:
Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,
And whilst a field should be dispatch'd and fought,
Saint Denis bless this happy stratagem!
And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.
I was the next by birth and parentage,
Sleeping or waking must I still prevail,
The life thou gavest me first was lost and done,
Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,
For him was I exchanged and ransomed.
Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you.
Where's the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.
[Aside]  Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue,
Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain
O, no, wherein Lord Talbot was o'erthrown:
He dies, we lose, I break my warlike word,
Be not dismay'd, fair lady, nor misconstrue
Your grace shall well and quietly enjoy.
Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl.
Yes, my good lord, a pure unspotted heart,
And sent our sons and husbands captivate.
[Aside]  Done like a Frenchman: turn, and turn again!
And ere that we will suffer such a prince,
Hath sullied all his gloss of former honour
And death's dishonourable victory
And like a hermit overpass'd thy days.
In earnest of further benefit,
Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away,
This shouldering of each other in the court,
His over-mounting spirit, and there died,
That we are here.
As well they may upbraid me with my crown,
Exeunt from the walls
France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess!
Then yield, my lords, and here conclude with me
And we for fear compell'd to shut our shops.
I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.
When others sleep upon their quiet beds,
Exeunt
Have I sought every country far and near,
COUNTESS
And York as fast upon your grace exclaims,
But howsoe'er, no simple man that sees
What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse?
I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgement,
By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.
That such immanity and bloody strife
So dreadful will not be as was his sight.
Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.
Until it wither with me to my grave
That, if it chance the one of us do fail,
Enter to the Protector at the Tower Gates BISHOP OF WINCHESTER and his men in tawny coats
The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart,
Burns under feigned ashes of forged love
And, in reguerdon of that duty done,
And is a pattern of celestial peace.
Most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise.
Now we are victors, upon us he smiles.
Out, tawny coats! out, scarlet hypocrite!
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?
Whither, my lord? from bought and sold Lord Talbot,
For treason executed in our late king's days?
And death approach not ere my tale be done.
And now to Paris, in this conquering vein:
Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?
But we will presently provide for them.
That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.
And let her head fall into England's lap.
But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure?
An if my father please, I am content.
Here enter'd Pucelle and her practisants,
RICHARD
Shall see thee wither'd, bloody, pale and dead.
As deputy unto that gracious king,
The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,
Alarum. Enter SUFFOLK with MARGARET in his hand
Command in Anjou what your honour pleases.
I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,
Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.
Exit
And ye choice spirits that admonish me
As market-men for oxen, sheep, or horse.
It was both impious and unnatural
Such fierce alarums both of hope and fear,
RICHARD
And dare not take up arms like gentlemen.
Then for the truth and plainness of the case.
Who, ring'd about with bold adversity,
Under the lordly monarch of the north,
Flight cannot stain the honour you have won,
And in submission will attend on her.
But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come?
Shall lay your stately and air-braving towers,
I was employ'd in passing to and fro,
Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:
Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.
As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus' death.
The period of thy tyranny approacheth.
And, after, meet you sooner than you would.
At Eltham Place I told your majesty.
Good cousins both, of York and Somerset,
Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseems
Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
The Turk, that two and fifty kingdoms hath,
Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof,
Assign'd am I to be the English scourge.
My courage try by combat, if thou darest,
For living idly here in pomp and ease,
Lost, and recover'd in a day again!
And you, good uncle, banish all offence:
How say you, madam, are ye so content?
He, being in the vaward, placed behind
Used intercession to obtain a league,
A parley sounded. Enter REIGNIER on the walls
Able to ravish any dull conceit:
Come hither, you that would be combatants:
Lord Talbot, do not so dishonour me:
Yield, my lord protector, yield, Winchester,
To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.
BISHOP
Who then but English Henry will be lord
For princes should be free.
How now, ambitious Humphry! what means this?
Once in contempt they would have barter'd me:
So, rushing in the bowels of the French,
O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man,
Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen's blood!
And he first took exceptions at this badge,
But first, to try her skill,
Here sound an English march. Enter, and pass over at a distance, TALBOT and his forces
Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak:
O, think upon the conquest of my father,
ACT V
If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu!
As who should say 'When I am dead and gone,
The burning torch in yonder turret stands.
Gloucester, I do defy thee. Lords, vouchsafe
To whom?
My wit untrain'd in any kind of art.
Betwixt ourselves and all our followers:
He fables not, I hear the enemy:
Alarum: excursions. Enter TALBOT led by a Servant
Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth.
Be it so.
An uproar, I dare warrant,
Wasted our country, slain our citizens
RICHARD
Yes, if it please your majesty, my liege.
Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure is
Before that England give the French the foil.
The special watchmen of our English weal,
Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.
And then your highness shall command a peace.
O, were mine eyeballs into bullets turn'd,
It was Alencon that enjoy'd my love.
He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.
My sighs and tears and will not once relent?
Enter SUFFOLK in conference with KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER and EXETER
As doth a ruler with unlawful oaths,
Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice
If son to Talbot, die at Talbot's foot.
Where is best place to make our battery next.
No leisure had he to enrank his men,
Have patience, noble duke, I may not open,
And that my fainting words do warrant death,
Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,
Of an invincible unconquer'd spirit!
And keep me on the side where still I am.
Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French,
Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.
Instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms:
Writes not so tedious a style as this.
Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me,
Of all exploits since first I follow'd arms,
Here they shoot. SALISBURY and GARGRAVE fall
And we be lords and rulers over Rouen,
And straightway give thy soul to him thou servest.
Was round encompassed and set upon.
So we be rid of them, do with 'em what thou wilt.
When arm in arm they both came swiftly running,
Collected for this expedition.
Exeunt
Endeavor'd my advancement to the throne:
My father was attached, not attainted,
And hark ye, sirs, because she is a maid,
'Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,
He bears him on the place's privilege,
RICHARD
Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,
Enter Sir William LUCY
Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot.
Since I have entered into these wars.
Among the people gather up a tenth.
A letter was deliver'd to my hands,
And rise created princely Duke of York.
Let's to the altar: heralds, wait on us:
He shall submit, or I will never yield.
That two such noble peers as ye should jar!
That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.
And in a moment makes them desolate.
Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?'
Thanks, gentle sir.
'Long all of Somerset and his delay.
And to sun's parching heat display'd my cheeks,
And then we'll try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.
For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.
And here advance it in the market-place,
Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance.
Me they concern, Regent I am of France.
O monstrous treachery! can this be so,
Deposed his nephew Richard, Edward's son,
When thou shalt see I'll meet thee to thy cost.
Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of Sheffield,
To my determined time thou gavest new date.
Give thee her hand, for sign of plighted faith.
Be patient, lords, and give them leave to speak.
To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.
In complete glory she reveal'd herself,
Tush, my good lord, this superficial tale
Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,
Which, once discern'd, shows that her meaning is,
From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood
Say, Earl of Suffolk--if thy name be so--
Upon the country where you make abode,
When at their mothers' moist eyes babes shall suck,
Ne'er trust me then, for when a world of men
it fitteth not a prelate so to plead.
State holy or unhallow'd, what of that?
The thrice-victorious Lord of Falconbridge,
[Aside]  Perish, base prince, ignoble Duke of York!
That peaceful truce shall be proclaim'd in France,
Cropp'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms,
And now no more ado, brave Burgundy,
Purpose to answer what thou canst object.
Nor men nor money hath he to make war.
O, my good lords, and virtuous Henry,
But where's the great Alcides of the field,
And never yet could frame my will to it,
SCENE V. The Tower of London.
Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.
In memory of her when she is dead,
Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.
And while I live, I'll ne'er fly from a man.
Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still,
Well, let them practise and converse with spirits:
Thus are poor servitors,
Of benefit proceeding from our king
With this immodest clamorous outrage
What means he now? Go ask him whither he goes.
Improvident soldiers! had your watch been good,
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:
We will entice the Duke of Burgundy
With those clear rays which she infused on me
RICHARD
Exeunt
Madam, I have been bold to trouble you,
To give thee answer of thy just demand.
You shall become true liegemen to his crown:
By our proceeding in hostility,
Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.
Now, like to whelps, we crying run away.
Enter a Sergeant of a band with two Sentinels
Of English Henry, shall this night appear
But death doth front thee with apparent spoil
To SOMERSET
Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have,
Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower
Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,
To cross the seas and to be crown'd in France:
This shall ye do, so help you righteous God!
Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,
Kind keepers of my weak decaying age,
Of old I know them, rather with their teeth
Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head,
Chaste and immaculate in very thought,
As is fair Margaret he be link'd in love.
The scarecrow that affrights our children so.
Created, for his rare success in arms,
COUNTESS
To think that you have aught but Talbot's shadow
To make a bastard and a slave of me!
Beat down Alencon, Orleans, Burgundy,
First Serving-Man	It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.
Damsel, I'll have a bout with you again,
Upon thy princely warrant, I descend
Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,
England all Olivers and Rowlands bred,
And pale destruction meets thee in the face.
Chief master-gunner am I of this town,
That stout Pendragon in his litter sick
Enter, on the walls, JOAN LA PUCELLE, CHARLES, REIGNIER, ALENCON, and Soldiers
Thou that contrivedst to murder our dead lord,
So fare my limbs with long imprisonment.
And for thy sake have I shed many a tear:
The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne,
Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy,
Reignier, is't thou that thinkest to beguile me?
So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
That beauty am I bless'd with which you see.
Speak, Winchester, for boiling choler chokes
Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,
If Sir John Fastolfe had not play'd the coward:
Which I, disdaining, scorn'd, and craved death,
Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.
Exit, with his soldiers
Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
I did imagine what would be her refuge.
Much more a knight, a captain and a leader.
Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.
Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?
And so will I.
I shall as famous be by this exploit
Having full scarce six thousand in his troop.
Be cast from possibility of all.
Or to exclaim on fortune's fickleness.
More than I do?--except I be provoked.
The other lords, like lions wanting food,
Instead whereof sharp stakes pluck'd out of hedges
Third Serving-man	And I will see what physic the tavern affords.
BISHOP
Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly.
Here SALISBURY lifteth himself up and groans
Exeunt
Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,
Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
But gather we our forces out of hand
Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen,
The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.
Sell every man his life as dear as mine,
And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,
If I my lord, for my opinion bleed,
Let me persuade you take a better course.
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,
England ne'er lost a king of so much worth.
Where be these warders, that they wait not here?
All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.
And otherwise will Henry ne'er presume.
In thee thy mother dies, our household's name,
About a certain question in the law
And will at last break out into a flame:
But that they left me 'midst my enemies.
Pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this,
Alencon, Reignier, compass him about,
Now, ye familiar spirits, that are cull'd
You of my household, leave this peevish broil
Why, what is he? as good a man as York.
Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.
Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence
Ascend, brave Talbot, we will follow thee.
Hang up your ensign, let your drums be still,
Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.
Enter a Messenger
While he, renowned noble gentleman,
That will I show you presently.
Exit
I shall be well content with any choice
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear:
Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.
How can these contrarieties agree?
Must be companion of his nuptial bed:
So farewell, Talbot, I'll no longer trust thee.
And will be partner of your weal or woe.
Who should be pitiful, if you be not?
Her beauty and the value of her dower,
By fair persuasions mix'd with sugar'd words
A short alarum
Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law:
SCENE II. Before Bourdeaux.
Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs,
Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take,
Submission, Dauphin! 'tis a mere French word,
But, ere we go, regard this dying prince,
He answer'd thus: 'Young Talbot was not born
I would his troubles likewise were expired,
Whom I with pain have woo'd and won thereto,
My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
'Tis true, I gave a noble to the priest
A witch, by fear, not force, like Hannibal,
And I to this.
This sudden execution of my will.
RICHARD
Go, and be free again, as Suffolk's friend.
French march. Enter BURGUNDY and forces
Heaven and our Lady gracious hath it pleased
But with a baser man of arms by far
Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
To be a public spectacle to all:
SCENE II. France. Before Orleans.
This speedy and quick appearance argues proof
Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.
Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place!
Shall send between the red rose and the white
Giving my verdict on the white rose side.
Begin again
Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, a Captain, and others
RICHARD
Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,
Enclosed were they with their enemies:
SCENE I. Paris. A hall of state.
In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.
Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn,
And seek how we may prejudice the foe.
Enter the COUNTESS and her Porter
Now for the honour of the forlorn French!
What! am I dared and bearded to my face?
And was he not in England prisoner?
I have, my lord: and their intent is this:
A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!
Because you want the grace that others have,
There's none protector of the realm but I.
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
Knight of the noble order of Saint George,
What, all amort? Rouen hangs her head for grief
So help me God, as I dissemble not!
Remember to avenge me on the French.'
That whoso draws a sword, 'tis present death,
Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,
And then I will proclaim young Henry king.
Him I forgive my death that killeth me
And I will answer unpremeditated:
But he shall know I am as good--
My lord, your loving nephew now is come.
How farest thou, mirror of all martial men?
Enter YORK, WARWICK, and others
SCENE IV. London. The Temple-garden.
Sent from our uncle Duke of Burgundy.
Hath been enacted through your enmity,
CARDINAL
Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount,
Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the walls
And I will chain these legs and arms of thine,
And rush'd into the bowels of the battle.
Here they fight, and JOAN LA PUCELLE overcomes
No loving token to his majesty?
Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity,
My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.
What though I be enthrall'd? he seems a knight,
Was not the Duke of Orleans thy foe?
Search out thy wit for secret policies,
For that's the end of human misery.
The presence of a king engenders love
Let this dissension first be tried by fight,
Within the Temple-hall we were too loud,
By guileful fair words peace may be obtain'd.
Wallon and Picardy are friends to us,
Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.
Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse,
Stand'st thou aloof upon comparison?
Think not, although in writing I preferr'd
RICHARD
That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.
What! is my Lord of Winchester install'd,
Would make a volume of enticing lines,
This factious bandying of their favourites,
Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid,
By reason of his adversary's odds:
Then lead me hence, with whom I leave my curse:
Might but redeem the passage of your age!
Now, Somerset, where is your argument?
Enter a Messenger
With other vile and ignominious terms:
SCENE I. London. The Parliament-house.
See, see the pining malady of France,
Come hither, captain.
Choked with ambition of the meaner sort:
And no way canst thou turn thee for redress,
A holy maid hither with me I bring,
And here I prophesy: this brawl to-day,
That with his name the mothers still their babes?
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE disguised, with four Soldiers with sacks upon their backs
Swift-winged with desire to get a grave,
RICHARD
God's mother deigned to appear to me
Exeunt
What?
Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours.
And fitter is my study and my books
For what is wedlock forced but a hell,
Argued betwixt the Duke of York and him,
BISHOP
Damsel of France, I think I have you fast:
I do remember it, and here take my leave,
And therefore, lords, since he affects her most,
For which I will divide my crown with her,
Enter the Boy with a linstock
Is this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester,
My forces and my power of men are yours:
Here cometh Charles: I marvel how he sped.
For though he seem with forged quaint conceit
Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye,
So much applauded through the realm of France?
Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
With silence, nephew, be thou politic:
The spirit of deep prophecy she hath,
Be not amazed, there's nothing hid from me:
Then let me stay, and, father, do you fly:
Drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves!
Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.
Hearing alarums at our chamber-doors.
That we do make our entrance several ways,
Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.
Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquish'd,
Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER, attended
And those two counties I will undertake
But yet, methinks, my father's execution
Winchester goose, I cry, a rope! a rope!
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,
[Aside]  Ay, but, I fear me, with a hollow heart.--
Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee:
And not protector, of the king or realm.
No one but he should be about the king,
Exeunt GLOUCESTER and EXETER
To try his strength, forsaketh yet the lists
I cry you mercy, 'tis but Quid for Quo.
Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.
Taste of your wine and see what cates you have,
Roam thither, then.
Stand back, you lords, and give us leave awhile.
Did look no better to that weighty charge.
To work exceeding miracles on earth.
Whereon to practise your severity.
Wilt thou accept of ransom? yea, or no.
That seeks to overthrow religion,
To trouble and disturb the king and us?
And yet a dispensation may be had.
More dazzled and drove back his enemies
Out, out! My lords, an please you, 'tis not so,
This quarrel will drink blood another day.
He that flies so will ne'er return again.
So let them have their answers every one:
And like as rigor of tempestuous gusts
Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster,
By sudden flight: come, dally not, be gone.
Have fill'd their pockets full of pebble stones
When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes,
And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,
Call ye the warlike Talbot, for his acts
And fightest with the sword of Deborah.
Upon my death the French can little boast,
Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils,
In any of our towns of garrison.
Is this the scourge of France?
Detract so much from that prerogative,
These are his substance, sinews, arms and strength,
To feast so great a warrior in my house.
If they perceive dissension in our looks
Thy wife is proud, she holdeth thee in awe,
The fewest roses are cropp'd from the tree
I owe him little duty, and less love,
Do breed love's settled passions in my heart:
Had I sufficient skill to utter them,
Retreat sounded
'Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
If you forsake the offer of their love.
RICHARD
Enter Sir William LUCY
And in defence of my lord's worthiness,
In which assault we lost twelve hundred men,
Enter, on the walls, a Master Gunner and his Boy
Plantagenet, I will, and like thee, Nero,
My gracious prince, and honourable peers,
Faith, I have been a truant in the law,
Myself, as far as I could well discern
And yet I would that you would answer me.
Sound, sound alarum! we will rush on them.
A thousand souls to death and deadly night.
How shall I honour thee for this success?
Now help, ye charming spells and periapts,
I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
An army have I muster'd in my thoughts,
Hear ye, captain, are you not at leisure?
'Tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeks
How I am braved and must perforce endure it!
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdun of Alton,
Go, take their bodies hence.
That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.
Shall pitch a field when we are dead.
Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle!
Exceeding the nine sibyls of old Rome:
But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
Ay,
See, then, thou fight'st against thy countrymen
Than the rich-jewel'd of Darius,
And in our coronation take your place.
Sergeant, you shall.
Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more,
With modesty admiring thy renown,
Enter Serving-men, in skirmish, with bloody pates
At pleasure here we lie near Orleans,
Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keeps
And ill beseeming any common man,
Exeunt all but BEDFORD and Attendants
During whose reign the Percies of the north,
Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.
No, no, I am but shadow of myself:
Say, gentle princess, would you not suppose
She and the Dauphin have been juggling:
Till by broad spreading it disperse to nought.
For by my mother I derived am
Remaineth none but mad-brain'd Salisbury,
His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.
If Dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.
'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won,
These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.
When stubbornly he did repugn the truth
For, I protest, we are well fortified
As liking of the lady's virtuous gifts,
Madam, I will.
If death be so apparent, then both fly.
For my profession's sacred from above:
Hast not a tongue? is she not here?
And we will make thee famous through the world.
Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.
A plague upon that villain Somerset,
Are ye so hot, sir? yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace,
SCENE II. France. Before Rouen.
What stir is this? what tumult's in the heavens?
Were growing time once ripen'd to my will.
Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder
Brave death by speaking, whether he will or no,
That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.
The treacherous manner of his mournful death
God and Saint George, Talbot and England's right,
How the English, in the suburbs close intrench'd,
In confutation of which rude reproach
The truth on our side.
It shall be with such strict and severe covenants
Thanks, gentle duke. But where is Pucelle now?
In spite of us or aught that we could do.
Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.
You are deceived, my substance is not here,
Together with the pitiful complaints
I doubt not but with honour to redress,
But your discretions better can persuade
Or else was wrangling Somerset in the error?
Sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, and EXETER
With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence:
So full-replete with choice of all delights,
And see the cities and the towns defaced
Are not the speedy scouts return'd again,
Whose life was England's glory, Gallia's wonder.
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?
Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.
I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.
Our great progenitors had conquered?
Lean, raw-boned rascals! who would e'er suppose
To bid his young son welcome to his grave?
His sparking eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
Have with thee, Pole. Farewell, ambitious Richard.
And turn again unto the warlike French.
And Talbot perisheth by your default.
Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.
What! will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot?
Great is the rumor of this dreadful knight,
Undaunted spirit in a dying breast!
Or I would see his heart out, ere the priest
These eyes, like lamps whose wasting oil is spent,
Despairing of his own arm's fortitude,
When foreign princes shall be certified
Upbraided me about the rose I wear,
SCENE IV. Paris. The palace.
Skirmish again
Let not sloth dim your horrors new-begot:
To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
Commit them to the fortune of the sea.
And, till thou be restored, thou art a yeoman.
I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne:
With written pamphlets studiously devised,
And so, my lord protector, see them guarded
Not me begotten of a shepherd swain,
And know us by these colours for thy foes,
And useth it to patronage his theft.
To bear with their perverse objections,
Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?
Exeunt
The bishop and the Duke of Gloucester's men,
See, how the ugly wench doth bend her brows,
What should I say? his deeds exceed all speech:
But always resolute in most extremes.
ACT II
To be the princely bride of such a lord,
And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true,
To rive their dangerous artillery
O Lord, have mercy on me, woful man!
A stouter champion never handled sword.
Come, go, I will dispatch the horsemen straight:
Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.
To be presented, by your victories,
His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams:
To say the truth, this fact was infamous
That Margaret shall be queen, and none but she.
If I could see them.
Welcome, high prince, the mighty Duke of York!
And that engenders thunder in his breast
With Henry's death the English circle ends,
In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation:
Hark! hark! the Dauphin's drum, a warning bell,
And on my side it is so well apparell'd,
She is content to be at your command,
BISHOP
England ne'er had a king until his time.
Now will it best avail your majesty
Wherewith already France is overrun.
Our windows are broke down in every street
Call'd the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles,
This seven years did not Talbot see his son,
Because this is in traffic of a king.
Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you,
Till you conclude that he upon whose side
RICHARD
Her aid she promised and assured success:
There should be found such false dissembling guile?
And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.
Your loss is great, so your regard should be,
Methinks his lordship should be humbler,
And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st
Am I not protector, saucy priest?
In spite of pope or dignities of church,
Stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents,
When for so slight and frivolous a cause
And humble service till the point of death.
And like me to the peasant boys of France,
Yet tell'st thou not how thou wert entertain'd.
Then God take mercy on brave Talbot's soul,
Although in glorious titles he excel.
But mine it will, that no exploit have done:
And, like a hungry lion, did commence
Retiring from the siege of Orleans,
Than wanton dalliance with a paramour.
And yet, methinks, I could be well content
If I now had him brought into my power.
Your hearts I'll stamp out with my horse's heels,
Take her away, for she hath lived too long,
Like to a trusty squire did run away:
As thou art knight, never to disobey
BISHOP
Let him that is a true-born gentleman
Then will I think upon a recompense.
Wont, through a secret grate of iron bars
Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.
I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast
I'll win this Lady Margaret. For whom?
To stop effusion of our Christian blood
Thy scarlet robes as a child's bearing-cloth
So will this base and envious discord breed.
Only give order for my funeral:
That for thyself: I will not so presume
A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace,
If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side,
Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle join'd,
Enter Fiends
When first this order was ordain'd, my lords,
For fly he could not, if he would have fled,
And will not any way dishonour me.
Howe'er unfortunate I miss'd my aim.
That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.
Thou art reverent
Open the gates, here's Gloucester that would enter.
Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,
Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtezan!
As his alliance will confirm our peace
BISHOP
There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight.
If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.
Thou ominous and fearful owl of death,
See here, my friends and loving countrymen,
For what you see is but the smallest part
Ay, see the bishop be not overborne.
Naught rests for me in this tumultuous strife
Let's leave this town, for they are hare-brain'd slaves,
This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain,
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age
I'll note you in my book of memory,
We mourn in black: why mourn we not in blood?
Keepers, convey him hence, and I myself
And so he did, but yet I like it not,
My lord, my lord, the French have gathered head:
Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters, were like thee.
His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc,
Advance our waving colours on the walls,
A goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace!
Murder not then the fruit within my womb,
To gather our soldiers, scatter'd and dispersed,
Upon a wooden coffin we attend,
Let us look in, the sight will much delight thee.
Unable to support this lump of clay,
Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,
Then gather strength and march unto him straight:
That droops his sapless branches to the ground,
In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.
So should I give consent to flatter sin.
All hail, my lords! which of this princely train
I see report is fabulous and false:
Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport,
Now, by God's will, thou wrong'st him, Somerset,
Discover more at large what cause that was,
Suddenly made him from my side to start
First Serving-Man	Villains, answer you so the lord protector?
Name not religion, for thou lovest the flesh,
The sum of money which I promised
Convey me Salisbury into his tent,
Either she hath bewitch'd me with her words,
Here on my knee I beg mortality,
To send such peevish tokens to a king.
Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth,
Which giveth many wounds when one will kill.
Now do thou watch, for I can stay no longer.
With Charles, Alencon and that traitorous rout.
To beat assailing death from his weak legions:
Dismay not, princes, at this accident,
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.
But kings and mightiest potentates must die,
Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
COUNTESS
Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear'st thy doom!
Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes,
If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.
Madam, I have a secret to reveal.
Serving-Men	Open the gates unto the lord protector,
Enter FASTOLFE
Lord regent, I do greet your excellence
If Talbot but survive thy treachery.
That so he might recover what was lost.
Stay, my lord legate: you shall first receive
That one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next.
A man of thy profession and degree,
Nay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot:
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE on the top, thrusting out a torch burning
SCENE III. Plains in Gascony.
And for thy treachery, what's more manifest?
Writ to your grace from the Duke of Burgundy.
My grisly countenance made others fly,
Thy father, Earl of Cambridge, then derived
Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness?
Enough: my soul shall then be satisfied.
O'ercharging your free purses with large fines,
Wicked and vile, and so her death concludes.
I am indeed.
This cardinal's more haughty than the devil.
For ere the glass, that now begins to run,
More than in women commonly is seen,
SCENE I. Westminster Abbey.
In single combat thou shalt buckle with me,
Marrying my sister that thy mother was,
Exeunt
King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long!
RICHARD
And that we find the slothful watch but weak,
They would but stink, and putrefy the air.
And feast and banquet in the open streets,
As if with Circe she would change my shape!
Ascribes the glory of his conquest got
Unto his dastard foemen is betray'd.
Trumpet sounds. Enter General and others, aloft
This dastard, at the battle of Patay,
Exeunt
I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.
I do remember how my father said
If we be English deer, be then in blood,
The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,
Ay, we may march in England or in France,
Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul,
Then how or which way should they first break in?
I think her old familiar is asleep:
And not of any challenge of desert,
Just death, kind umpire of men's miseries,
Enter RICHARD PLANTAGENET
Did represent my master's blushing cheeks,
And not seek a queen to make him rich:
Of which, my lord, your honour is the last.
Alarum. Here another skirmish
In thy despite shall 'scape mortality.
BEDFORD dies, and is carried in by two in his chair
The walls they'll tear down than forsake the siege.
I may have liberty to venge this wrong,
Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French,
And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Now thou art come unto a feast of death,
Of beauteous Margaret hath astonish'd me:
Again in pity of my hard distress
Do it without invention, suddenly,
I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.
Exeunt
All France will be replete with mirth and joy,
Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears,
Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
See, where he lies inhearsed in the arms
What answer makes your grace unto my suit?
I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there:
Signior, no.
We are like to have the overthrow again.
Kneels
I am come to survey the Tower this day:
Is not his grace protector to the king?
And hath detain'd me all my flowering youth
This expedition was by York and Talbot
BISHOP
Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?
I must not yield to any rites of love,
Dies
As well at London bridge as at the Tower.
Pray, uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.
Impatiently I burn with thy desire,
Encompass'd with thy lustful paramours!
Break thou in pieces and consume to ashes,
We charge you, on allegiance to ourself,
Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour'd me.
O, that I could but call these dead to life!
It grieves his highness: good my lords, be friends.
Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come:
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.
If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.
The prince's espials have informed me
Break up the gates, I'll be your warrantize.
All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.
Either to get the town again or die:
You speedy helpers, that are substitutes
Go forward and be choked with thy ambition!
They pitched in the ground confusedly,
CARDINAL
Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection.
Glory is like a circle in the water,
Of all his wars within the realm of France?
Exeunt all but EXETER
Although ye hale me to a violent death.
Placing therein some expert officers,
But only, with your patience, that we may
With any passion of inflaming love,
Sound a flourish. Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, marching with drum and Soldiers
SCENE IV. Other plains in Gascony.
Exeunt
I'll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal's hat,
Third Serving-man	My lord, we know your grace to be a man
Or one that, at a triumph having vow'd
Thus Joan la Pucelle hath perform'd her word.
But yet be wary in thy studious care.
To keep our great Saint George's feast withal:
The circumstance I'll tell you more at large.
Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign,
Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee:
And sold their bodies for their country's benefit,
Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,
Upon condition I may quietly
All manner of men assembled here in arms this day
If thou spy'st any, run and bring me word,
God knows thou art a collop of my flesh,
Appear and aid me in this enterprise.
My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.
Ay, ay: away with her to execution!
And, which is more, she is not so divine,
Fair maid, is't thou wilt do these wondrous feats?
An if I fly, I am not Talbot's son:
That hast by tyranny these many years
Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord!
And make the cowards stand aloof at bay:
Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear!
ACT I
Lest it be said 'Speak, sirrah, when you should,
Victorious Talbot! pardon my abuse:
Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.
Then have I substance too.
The hollow passage of my poison'd voice,
They depart
'Thou maiden youth, be vanquish'd by a maid:'
Exeunt
Alarum. Excursions. Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE
Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean
No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath been
Worthy Saint Michael and the Golden Fleece,
Why, here's a girl! I think she knows not well,
Well didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice,
RICHARD
henceforward, upon pain of death.
Whom with my bare fists I would execute,
That he is march'd to Bourdeaux with his power,
Come, officer, as loud as e'er thou canst,
Fie, lords! that you, being supreme magistrates,
Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive
Exeunt
Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place:
That, when thou comest to kneel at Henry's feet,
And not deface your honour with reproach?
Away, away, good William de la Pole!
Their arms are set like clocks, stiff to strike on,
He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.
Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,
To crown himself king and suppress the prince.
But darkness and the gloomy shade of death
My hand would free her, but my heart says no
And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure.
Saying, the sanguine colour of the leaves
With purpose to relieve and follow them,
And happiness to his accomplices!
Not all together: better far, I guess,
So many captains, gentlemen and soldiers,
Or tear the lions out of England's coat,
And thou be thrust out like a fugitive?
More blessed hap did ne'er befall our state.
Thou hast astonish'd me with thy high terms:
Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but EXETER
Enter Soldiers, with the body of JOHN TALBOT
If I were covetous, ambitious or perverse,
Exeunt REIGNIER and MARGARET
And not have title of an earldom here.
That grudge one thought against your majesty!
Henceforth we banish thee, on pain of death.
SCENE VII. Another part of the field.
Here is the Talbot: who would speak with him?
A little herd of England's timorous deer,
At all times will you have my power alike?
Bedford, if thou be slack, I'll fight it out.
To woo so fair a dame to be his wife,
Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise:
And free my country from calamity:
Yes, sir, as well as you dare patronage
But when they heard he was thine enemy,
Farewell, sweet madam: but hark you, Margaret,
Is Paris lost? is Rouen yielded up?
For I am ignorant and cannot guess.
Whither away! to save myself by flight:
For I have loaden me with many spoils,
RICHARD
By three and twenty thousand of the French
COUNTESS
But Reignier, king of Naples, that prevail'd.
To tutor thee in stratagems of war,
For things that are not to be remedied.
Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.
As fester'd members rot but by degree,
Compassion on the king commands me stoop,
Not what you are, I know it will excuse
Swearing that you withhold his levied host,
Before we met or that a stroke was given,
I will not live to be accounted Warwick.
A man of great authority in France,
From him I have express commandment
Exit
BISHOP
Will'd me to leave my base vocation
Curse, miscreant, when thou comest to the stake.
And, madam, at your father's castle walls
That Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to come
That he should be so abject, base and poor,
Destroy'd themselves, and lost the realm of France!
But prove a chief offender in the same?
And like a mountain, not to be removed.
My noble Lord of Suffolk, or for that
In fine, redeem'd I was as I desired.
Give me my steeled coat. I'll fight for France.
By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower,
Enter the Earls of SOMERSET, SUFFOLK, and WARWICK, RICHARD PLANTAGENET, VERNON, and another Lawyer
Winds his horn. Drums strike up: a peal of ordnance. Enter soldiers
Expect Saint Martin's summer, halcyon days,
But unto thee, Alencon, and the rest,
How much in duty I am bound to both.
And in that sea of blood my boy did drench
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands!
He doth intend she shall be England's queen.
Drives back our troops and conquers as she lists:
Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.
And should, if I were worthy to be judge,
Enshrines thee in his heart and there erects
O young John Talbot! I did send for thee
Exit
Heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail?
That Margaret may be England's royal queen.
Thy promises are like Adonis' gardens
This proffer is absurd and reasonless.
I did beget her, all the parish knows:
Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.
And to survey the bodies of the dead.
Henry the Fifth: whiles they each other cross,
We have been guided by thee hitherto,
Pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish,
And this withal.
Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,
One sudden foil shall never breed distrust.
[Within]  Who's there that knocks so imperiously?
To-morrow I shall die with mickle age:
He'll make his cap co-equal with the crown.'
Enter a Messenger
The Bastard of Orleans with him is join'd,
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me:
For soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.
Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?
Who willed you? or whose will stands but mine?
I'll lop a member off and give it you
Exit TALBOT. Alarum, retreat, flourish
How shall we then dispense with that contract,
Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.
Knocks
That have consented unto Henry's death!
Within her quarter and mine own precinct
Doubtless he would have made a noble knight,
This token serveth for a flag of truce
And what offence it is to flout his friends.
His days may finish ere that hapless time.
And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.
Than to be dealt in by attorneyship,
If I to-day die not with Frenchmen's rage,
BISHOP
Grown to this faction in the Temple-garden,
SCENE II. Orleans. Within the town.
Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
Go, call her in.
COUNTESS
Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,
Help Salisbury to make his testament:
For I am sorry that with reverence
But we shall meet, and break our minds at large.
Or durst not, for his craven heart, say thus.
Talk like the vulgar sort of market men
His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings,
That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!
The help of one stands me in little stead.
In yonder tower, to overpeer the city,
Peasant, avaunt! You have suborn'd this man,
The coward horse that bears me fail and die!
Salisbury is a desperate homicide,
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,
Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with him
Marriage is a matter of more worth
Mayor, farewell: thou dost but what thou mayst.
This is the latest glory of thy praise
Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.
As looks the mother on her lowly babe
COUNTESS
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.
And twit with cowardice a man half dead?
Flourish. Exeunt all but YORK, WARWICK, EXETER and VERNON
All 'long of this vile traitor Somerset.
What the conditions of that league must be.
Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.
But, if you frown upon this proffer'd peace,
And even these three days have I watch'd,
Well, my good lord, and as the only means
The world will say, he is not Talbot's blood,
Or by what means got'st thou to be released?
And have install'd me in the diadem:
The Duke of Bedford had a prisoner
Exit Sergeant
And none but women left to wail the dead.
This is my servant: hear him, noble prince.
Here, said they, is the terror of the French,
Now, governor of Paris, take your oath,
Question, my lords, no further of the case,
And left us to the rage of France his sword.
Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore:
Lest bleeding you do paint the white rose red
I'll over then to England with this news,
A woman clad in armour chaseth them.
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
Madam, it is.
My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.
What tumult's this?
A noise within, 'Down with the tawny-coats!'
That ever living man of memory,
Between the realms of England and of France.
And with them scourge the bad revolting stars
Never yet taint with love, I send the king.
And drive the English forth the bounds of France.
O, turn thy edged sword another way,
Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.
To put a golden sceptre in thy hand
How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit,
BISHOP
Will see his burial better than his life.
Rise Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
For live I will not, if my father die.
It were enough to fright the realm of France:
Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.
To leave the Talbot and to follow us.
There all is marr'd, there lies a cooling card.
Then I perceive that will be verified
Villain, thou know'st the law of arms is such
Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!
And Charles, upon condition thou wilt swear
My lords ambassadors, your several suits
Come in, and let us banquet royally,
They walk, and speak not
SCENE III. Auvergne. The COUNTESS's castle.
Posterity, await for wretched years,
Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne'er could brook?
He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.
By your espials were discovered
And have our bodies slaughtered by thy foes.
Confirm it so! Confounded be your strife!
Bear hence his body, I will help to bury it.
In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage
Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?
I will attend upon your lordship's leisure.
We'll pull his plumes and take away his train,
To me.
An if I wist he did,--but let it rest,
And more than may be gather'd by thy shape.
For here we entertain a solemn peace.
But now the substance shall endure the like,
When from the Dauphin's crest thy sword struck fire,
Which is so plain that Exeter doth wish
What's past and what's to come she can descry.
Alarum. Exeunt
May never glorious sun reflex his beams
The king, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt
You fled for vantage, everyone will swear,
Exit
His soldiers spying his undaunted spirit
Civil dissension is a viperous worm
By bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds!
Or how haps it I seek not to advance
Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms
Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.
If holy churchmen take delight in broils?
Renounce your soil, give sheep in lions' stead:
The English army, that divided was
But when my angry guardant stood alone,
Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
No, gentle madam, I unworthy am
But issued from the progeny of kings,
Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the duke
Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused,
And I am lowted by a traitor villain
I'll bear them hence, but from their ashes shall be rear'd
Drum afar off
Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had,
Away, my masters! trouble us no more,
Long since we were resolved of your truth,
In golden palaces, as it becomes.
And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint:
Should strike such terror to his enemies.
Stay, stay thy hands! thou art an Amazon
Hearing of your arrival in this realm,
Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.
To fill the world with vicious qualities.
Yet livest thou, Salisbury? though thy speech doth fail,
More than God or religious churchmen may.
Since arms avail not now that Henry's dead.
By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe
Yes, your renowned name: shall flight abuse it?
The noble Duke of Bedford late deceased,
RICHARD
My breast I'll burst with straining of my courage
And all the troops of English after him.
Anon, from thy insulting tyranny,
Your roof were not sufficient to contain't.
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.
They call'd us for our fierceness English dogs,
And in a vision full of majesty
Finish the process of his sandy hour,
BISHOP
I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here,
So kind a father of the commonweal,
'Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.
The French exclaim'd, the devil was in arms,
And if thou be not then created York,
My vows are equal partners with thy vows.
And now I fear that fatal prophecy
Then take my soul, my body, soul and all,
Exeunt
And join'd with Charles, the rightful King of France.'
I think this Talbot be a fiend of hell.
Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France!
Be gone, I say, for, till you do return,
Ask me what question thou canst possible,
To be the pillage of a giglot wench:'
And here I will expect thy coming.
BISHOP
As that whereof I had the government,
The Dauphin Charles is crowned king of Rheims,
Summon their general unto the wall.
And made me almost yield upon my knees.
Comets, importing change of times and states,
That warranteth by law to be thy privilege.
Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.
By inspiration of celestial grace,
These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.
Was in the mouth of every sucking babe,
Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.
And I have heard it said, unbidden guests
Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?
But burning fatal to the Talbotites!
To ease your country of distressful war,
By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.
That which I have than, coveting for more,
And I'll withdraw me and my bloody power:
Her ashes, in an urn more precious
That walked about me every minute-while,
As witting I no other comfort have.
Drive them from Orleans and be immortalized.
God save King Henry, of that name the sixth!
But I will chastise this high-minded strumpet.
That Richard be restored to his blood.
COUNTESS
No, my good lords, it is not that offends,
Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.
Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
Here, here she comes. I'll have a bout with thee,
And, in advantage lingering, looks for rescue,
Whether it be through force of your report,
Which in the time of Henry named the Fifth
And I, as sure as English Henry lives
Methinks my lord should be religious
What ruin happen'd in revenge of him,
Thou art allotted to be ta'en by me:
That will not trust thee but for profit's sake?
Cry: 'St. George,' 'A Talbot.'
The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.
And now they meet where both their lives are done.
He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.
And, for myself, most part of all this night,
So in the earth, to this day is not known:
I am left out, for me nothing remains.
He was a king bless'd of the King of kings.
Ha, ha, ha!
Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
Were there surprised and taken prisoners.
Unless my study and my books be false,
Exit
Thou princely leader of our English strength,
And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes
I will, if that my fading breath permit
Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.
The regent hath with Talbot broke his word
A Talbot! a Talbot! cried out amain
Or horse or oxen from the leopard,
My thoughts are whirled like a potter's wheel,
Is but a preface of her worthy praise,
Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.
One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosom
Of England's coat one half is cut away.
Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the earth,
Exeunt
Then broke I from the officers that led me,
Before whose glory I was great in arms,
They may vex us with shot, or with assault.
RICHARD
Came to the field and vanquished his foes:
His crown shall be the ransom of my friend,
On either hand thee there are squadrons pitch'd,
Then thus it must be, this doth Joan devise:
Which by a vision sent to her from heaven
Adorn his temples with a coronet,
Come, come, return, return, thou wandering lord:
And I again, in Henry's royal name,
They did amongst the troops of armed men
We'll fall to it with our teeth.
My lord, you do not well in obstinacy
If the first hour I shrink and run away.
I'll by a sign give notice to our friends,
Enter TALBOT, with trump and drum
Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs a-field,
Condemn'd to die for treason, but no traitor,
When sapless age and weak unable limbs
If Henry were recall'd to life again,
CARDINAL
Or whether that such cowards ought to wear
To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate,
I should have begg'd I might have been employ'd.
An age of discord and continual strife?
Father, I know, and oft have shot at them,
But weakly guarded, where the breach was made.
With more than half the Gallian territories,
Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
To intercept this inconvenience,
I would prevail, if prayers might prevail,
For God's sake let him have 'em, to keep them here,
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.
Enter to them another Messenger
And makes him roar these accusations forth.
Was Mahomet inspired with a dove?
Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee,
COUNTESS
Enter Messenger and TALBOT
The tenth of August last this dreadful lord,
Speak on, but be not over-tedious.
And whiles the honourable captain there
With him, my lord, for he hath done me wrong.
Traitors have never other company.
No, prelate, such is thy audacious wickedness,
The conquest of our scarce cold conqueror,
Something I must do to procure me grace.
I have inform'd his highness so at large
Will I for ever and my faction wear,
That malice was a great and grievous sin,
And may ye both be suddenly surprised
Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?
Here will I sit before the walls of Rouen
Disgracing of these colours that I wear
In that he wears the badge of Somerset.
For I intend to have it ere long.
Nor grieve that Rouen is so recovered:
Who ever saw the like? what men have I!
Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but VERNON and BASSET
So farewell, Reignier: set this diamond safe
We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber,
Arm! arm! the enemy doth make assault!
Enter, on the turrets, SALISBURY and TALBOT, GLANSDALE, GARGRAVE, and others
And run a tilt at death within a chair?
I prithee, give me leave to curse awhile.
It is not that that hath incensed the duke:
Here an alarum again: and TALBOT pursueth the  DAUPHIN, and driveth him: then enter JOAN LA  PUCELLE, driving Englishmen before her, and exit after them then re-enter TALBOT
And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder.
Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is,
We'll set thy statue in some holy place,
Peace, mayor! thou know'st little of my wrongs:
And strong enough to issue out and fight:
Or aught intend'st to lay unto my charge,
ACT IV
Presently we'll try: come, let's away about it:
Excursions. Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLE fighting hand  to hand with YORK. JOAN LA PUCELLE is taken. The French fly.
Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
RICHARD
Here's Beaufort, that regards nor God nor king,
And if I did but stir out of my bed,
To your obedience fifty fortresses,
Talbot, my life, my joy, again return'd!
And I with him, for he hath done me wrong.
'If once he come to be a cardinal,
Exit
How were they lost? what treachery was used?
Porter, remember what I gave in charge,
And now, my lord protector, view the letter
I have awhile given truce unto my wars,
The King of Naples, whosoe'er thou art.
O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart
They fight again
RICHARD
SCENE V. The English camp near Bourdeaux.
Dare ye come forth and meet us in the field?
She takes upon her bravely at first dash.
Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.
And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.
I think, at the north gate, for there stand lords.
That here you maintain several factions,
What towns of any moment but we have?
The valiant Duke of Bedford. Come, my lord,
Environ you, till mischief and despair
SCENE V. The same.
With which he yoketh your rebellious necks,
That, neither in birth or for authority,
And, by his treason, stand'st not thou attainted,
To wall thee from the liberty of flight,
Here is a silly stately style indeed!
COUNTESS
It is, because no one should sway but he,
Alencon! that notorious Machiavel!
They laboured to plant the rightful heir,
And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.
For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,
COUNTESS
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.
No more can I be sever'd from your side,
RICHARD
Exit, guarded
This ornament of knighthood, yea or no.
Of loss, of slaughter and discomfiture:
Either to suffer shipwreck or arrive
Away, captains! let's get us from the walls,
O Warwick, Warwick! I foresee with grief
How say'st thou, Charles? shall our condition stand?
I know thee well, though never seen before.
We'll follow them with all the power we have.
SCENE IV. Camp of the YORK in Anjou.
Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?
They humbly sue unto your excellence
Upon my blessing, I command thee go.
Unto the French the dreadful judgement-day
Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.
To cavil in the course of this contract:
Is likely to beget more conquerors,
How say you, madam? are you now persuaded
And for the proffer of my lord your master,
Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife,
Fie, uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach
To choose for wealth and not for perfect love.
Foul fiend of France, and hag of all despite,
And set a precious crown upon thy head,
Like captives bound to a triumphant car.
For though her father be the King of Naples,
So, now dismiss your army when ye please:
As to be call'd but viceroy of the whole?
What say'st thou, Charles? for I am marching hence.
So shall his father's wrongs be recompensed.
When I was young, as yet I am not old,
Leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field.
It would amaze the proudest of you all.
BISHOP
Between two blades, which bears the better temper:
And that I'll prove on better men than Somerset,
O, let no words, but deeds, revenge this treason!
To be a queen in bondage is more vile
Too rashly plotted: all our general force
A holy prophetess new risen up,
Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,
Be patient, York: if we conclude a peace,
First to my God and next unto your grace.
As he will have me, how am I so poor?
First let me know, and then I'll answer you.
Wretched shall France be only in my name.
Is that the worst this letter doth contain?
If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.
This is a riddling merchant for the nonce,
SCENE I. Before Orleans.
O, negligent and heedless discipline!
O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks,
Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss,
Why, for my king: tush, that's a wooden thing!
Now am I like that proud insulting ship
In honour of my noble Lord of York:
BISHOP
Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen:
Why, art not thou the man?
Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends,
Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs!
Should reign among professors of one faith.
Thou art no friend to God or to the king:
Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,
Enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS
Lord bishop, set the crown upon his head.
They set him free without his ransom paid,
Exeunt General,  and c
Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the town?
Help me this once, that France may get the field.
Of thy nativity! I would the milk
Till with thy warlike sword, despite of late,
Second Serving-man	And so will I.
Why speak'st thou not? what ransom must I pay?
No prophet will I trust, if she prove false.
After the slaughter of so many peers,
Farewell, my lord: good wishes, praise and prayers
First, lean thine aged back against mine arm,
All the Talbots in the world, to save my life!
Now where's the Bastard's braves, and Charles his gleeks?
Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.
This is a double honour, Burgundy:
My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.
O, hold me not with silence over-long!
But dies, betray'd to fortune by your strife.
Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLE
Speak, Salisbury, at least, if thou canst speak:
This late dissension grown betwixt the peers
With long continuance in a settled place.
Yet never have you tasted our reward,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?
Drum sounds afar off
Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?
And, commendable proved, let's die in pride.
Poor gentleman! his wrong doth equal mine.
churchyard,
I am descended of a gentler blood:
O Lord, have mercy on us, wretched sinners!
I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.
Just and upright, and, for your royal birth,
Lets fall his sword before your highness' feet,
A virgin from her tender infancy,
I fear we should have seen decipher'd there
Pardon me, princely Henry, and the rest
We should have found a bloody day of this.
I met in travel toward his warlike father!
Lady, wherefore talk you so?
When Talbot hath set footing once in France
Forward by nature, enemy to peace,
So sure I swear to get the town or die.
Master-Gunner	But now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me:
Too late comes rescue: he is ta'en or slain,
What you have done hath not offended me,
We do exhibit to your majesty.
Third son to the third Edward King of England:
A prophet to the fall of all our foes!
And know the office that belongs to such.
I laugh to see your ladyship so fond
Gloucester's men rush at the Tower Gates, and WOODVILE the Lieutenant speaks within
That sunder'd friends greet in the hour of death.
Or doth this churlish superscription
Henry is youthful and will quickly yield.
SCENE IV. Orleans.
And safely brought to Dover, where inshipp'd
To love and honour Henry as her lord.
Yes, lord, her father is a king,
O, thou, whose wounds become hard-favour'd death,
Methinks I should revive the soldiers' hearts,
The other yet may rise against their force.
Enter CHARLES, BURGUNDY, ALENCON, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, REIGNIER, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forces
For shame, my lord of Winchester, relent!
Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.
Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour,
Welcome, brave earl, into our territories:
My honourable lords, health to you all!
What! wherein Talbot overcame? is't so?
Triumphant death, smear'd with captivity,
SCENE V. London. The palace.
Whom should we match with Henry, being a king,
There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.
Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel
Shall be engraved the sack of Orleans,
Rather than life preserved with infamy.
It is too late, I cannot send them now:
See, they forsake me! Now the time is come
Your ships already are in readiness.
I mean to tug it and to cuff you soundly:
The English whisper together in council
And set upon our boasting enemy.
Not to be gone from hence, for once I read
In iron walls they deem'd me not secure,
Exit
Thou bastard of my grandfather!
Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part,
Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good,
O, what a scandal is it to our crown,
That therefore I have forged, or am not able
Or flourish to the height of my degree.
A tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interr'd:
That plotted thus our glory's overthrow?
In whom the tide rested, were suppress'd.
O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay,
It dies, an if it had a thousand lives.
Only reserved, you claim no interest
The truth appears so naked on my side
Signior, hang! base muleters of France!
Inferior to none but to his majesty:
Against my lord the Duke of Somerset.
But one imperious in another's throne?
This argues what her kind of life hath been,
Now she is there, how will she specify
These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart:
Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise
Kisses her
Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,
Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.
And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,
Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake,
Crossing the sea from England into France,
Gloucester, we will meet, to thy cost, be sure:
The Dauphin crowned king! all fly to him!
He talks at random, sure, the man is mad.
I feel such sharp dissension in my breast,
Thou, nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.
A far more glorious star thy soul will make
They hang their heads
It warm'd thy father's heart with proud desire
Yet call the ambassador, and, as you please,
My lord, where are you? what devise you on?
Henry is dead and never shall revive:
But since your ladyship is not at leisure,
To be mine own attorney in this case.
Welcome, brave duke! thy friendship makes us fresh.
Strikes him
Between two horses, which doth bear him best,
A statelier pyramis to her I'll rear
BISHOP
His sword did ne'er leave striking in the field.
Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed
Where I may have fruition of her love.
Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?
Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,
That Henry born at Monmouth should win all
What, shall a child instruct you what to do?
Young Talbot's valour makes me smile at thee:
As very infants prattle of thy pride.
Art thou not weary, John? how dost thou fare?
Stinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.
Only this proof I'll of thy valour make,
BISHOP
Knights of the garter were of noble birth,
My gracious lords, to add to your laments,
Hath banish'd moody discontented fury,
ACT III
Embrace we then this opportunity
Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs,
With scoffs and scorns and contumelious taunts.
Than I am able to instruct or teach:
Comest thou with deep premeditated lines,
Here had the conquest fully been seal'd up,
[Within]  Whoe'er he be, you may not be let in.
To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.
Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep,
Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth,
So should we save a valiant gentleman
I grieve to hear what torments you endured,
Thy noble deeds as valour's monuments.
Insulting Charles! hast thou by secret means
That for a trifle that was bought with blood
In that thou laid'st a trap to take my life,
Shall we give over Orleans, or no?
CARDINAL
Long after this, when Henry the Fifth,
Recover'd is the town of Orleans:
Than Julius Caesar or bright--
Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
Look to it well and say you are well warn'd.
But that it doth presage some ill event.
'Tis known already that I am possess'd
Question her proudly, let thy looks be stern:
Conjurers and sorcerers, that afraid of him
And all the priests and friars in my realm
How the young whelp of Talbot's, raging-wood,
Whilst any trump did sound, or drum struck up,
Now it is supper-time in Orleans:
So let us still continue peace and love.
The cry of Talbot serves me for a sword,
Exit
Let's raise the siege: why live we idly here?
Let me be umpire in this doubtful strife.
Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress,
Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
Malicious practises against his state:
How are we park'd and bounded in a pale,
Pity the city of London, pity us!
BISHOP
Have batter'd me like roaring cannon-shot,
Whom all France with their chief assembled strength
'I have, upon especial cause,
But we will be revenged sufficiently
Thou with an eagle art inspired then.
Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.
In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.
Exeunt
And, in that ease, I'll tell thee my disease.
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
And once again we'll sleep secure in Rouen.
To Eltham will I, where the young king is,
We will bestow you in some better place,
Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.
And thence discover how with most advantage
Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER in Cardinal's habit, a Legate and two Ambassadors
Suffolk, what remedy?
And joint'st with them will be thy slaughtermen.
Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me
But yet, before we go, let's not forget
Exit
Yes, when his holy state is touch'd so near.
Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb?
Exeunt
Because, forsooth, the king of Scots is crown'd.
Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.
Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy:'
What wills Lord Talbot pleaseth Burgundy.
Or shall we think the subtle-witted French
What is that wrong whereof you both complain?
I pluck this red rose with young Somerset
Like to a pair of loving turtle-doves
An alarum: excursions. Enter FASTOLFE and a Captain
O, too much folly is it, well I wot,
Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BURGUNDY, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forces
Lives, honours, lands and all hurry to loss.
What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
How now, my lords! what, all unready so?
This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,
Fit to be made companion with a king:
Farewell, my masters, to my task will I,
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake,
Than is a slave in base servility,
Is all our travail turn'd to this effect?
None do you like but an effeminate prince,
Stoop then and set your knee against my foot,
But all the whole inheritance I give
And that within ourselves we disagree,
command you, in his highness' name, to repair to
And what a terror he had been to France.
And, like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,
Not seeing what is likely to ensue.
To hazard all our lives in one small boat!
A piece of ordnance 'gainst it I have placed,
Sweet madam, give me a hearing in a cause--
One eye thou hast, to look to heaven for grace:
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.
Even like a man new haled from the rack,
The shame hereof will make me hide my head.
For every drop of blood was drawn from him,
For I have seen our enemies' overthrow.
Great marshal to Henry the Sixth
I'll turn my part thereof into thy throat.
Ay, beauty's princely majesty is such,
Will I upon thy party wear this rose:
This jarring discord of nobility,
No way to that, for weakness, which she enter'd.
My age was never tainted with such shame.
We'll crave a parley, to confer with him.
That hardly we escaped the pride of France.
To be our regent in these parts of France:
To compass wonders but by help of devils.
I do, thou most usurping proditor,
What ransom must I pay before I pass?
Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss,
More truly now may this be verified,
If happy England's royal king be free.
I go to certify her Talbot's here.
The garden here is more convenient.
And he may well in fretting spend his gall,
Is Talbot slain? then I will slay myself,
That dogg'd the mighty army of the Dauphin?
Exit
And fashion'd thee that instrument of ill,
Then follow thou thy desperate sire of Crete,
Virtuous and holy, chosen from above,
The middle centre of this cursed town.
Vow, Burgundy, by honour of thy house,
Out of the powerful regions under earth,
Marriage, uncle! alas, my years are young!
And prosperous be thy life in peace and war!
She was the first fruit of my bachelorship.
Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn:
Go cheerfully together and digest.
Marry, for that she's in a wrong belief,
And that the French were almost ten to one,
As sure as in this late-betrayed town
A maid, they say.
Of horsemen, that were levied for this siege!
And make this marriage to be solemnized.
Come, let us four to dinner: I dare say
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?
No more but, plain and bluntly, 'To the king!'
As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.
He fighteth as one weary of his life.
All the whole army stood agazed on him:
We shall not find like opportunity.
Christ's mother helps me, else I were too weak.
Enter Sir William LUCY, attended, Herald of the French preceding
Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin's tent,
Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.
By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.
And stands upon the honour of his birth,
It shall,
They shake their heads
And will not you maintain the thing you teach,
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE, guarded, and a Shepherd
Than can yourself yourself in twain divide:
Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
Or be inferior to the proudest peer.
Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.
RICHARD
Except it be to pray against thy foes.
And natural graces that extinguish art,
Exit BASTARD OF ORLEANS
I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can,
In open market-place produced they me,
Yet, if this servile usage once offend.
[Aside]  So help me God, as I intend it not!
The king from Eltham I intend to steal
You all consented unto Salisbury's death,
On what submissive message art thou sent?
The church's prayers made him so prosperous.
That I, thy enemy, due thee withal,
Since they, so few, watch such a multitude.
As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,
Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils,
I see no reason, if I wear this rose,
Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge,
Summon a parley, we will talk with him.
Enter, go in, the market bell is rung.
Where is my strength, my valour, and my force?
Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth,
Through which our policy must make a breach:
Peace be amongst them, if they turn to us,
How say you, my lord? are you not content?
To scourge you for this apprehension:
It will not be: retire into your trenches:
Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not,
To know the cause of your abrupt departure.
Exit
Be not dismay'd, for succor is at hand:
Wilt thou be daunted at a woman's sight?
English John Talbot, captains, calls you forth,
I am with child, ye bloody homicides:
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,
We come to be informed by yourselves
Was cursed instrument of his decease.
Or sack this country with a mutiny.
'Tis much when sceptres are in children's hands,
To Bourdeaux, warlike duke! to Bourdeaux, York!
Lords, view these letters full of bad mischance.
Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock,
Could not prevail with all their oratory,
Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.
As I with sudden and extemporal speech
But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint.
Had death been French, then death had died to-day.
But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,
Consent, and for thy honour give consent,
For your partaker Pole and you yourself,
Forsaken your pernicious faction
Froissart, a countryman of ours, records,
The Cardinal of Winchester forbids:
Why didst thou say, of late thou wert despised?
Great Coeur-de-lion's heart was buried,
By my consent, we'll even let them alone.
Yet heavens have glory for this victory!
And here at hand the Dauphin and his train
Which join'd with him and made their march for Bourdeaux.
Here they skirmish again
Yet hath a woman's kindness over-ruled:
Hear, hear how dying Salisbury doth groan!
His thread of life had not so soon decay'd:
Unto another lady of esteem:
Lean famine, quartering steel, and climbing fire,
SCENE VI. The same.
And doth deserve a coronet of gold.
That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.
Except some petty towns of no import:
Thou Icarus, thy life to me is sweet:
BISHOP
But with as humble lowliness of mind
Your wondrous rare description, noble earl,
Virtue he had, deserving to command:
And wash away thy country's stained spots.
That Talbot is but shadow of himself?
I will not slay thee, but I'll drive thee back:
Surely, by all the glory you have won,
Enter MORTIMER, brought in a chair, and Gaolers
SCENE III. Before Angiers.
Never to England shall he bear his life,
COUNTESS
Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
Well then, alone, since there's no remedy,
A third thinks, without expense at all,
And so, conduct me where, from company,
And do him homage as obedient subjects,
Your faithful service and your toil in war,
Or nature makes me suddenly relent.
But to make open proclamation:
Whispers
A phoenix that shall make all France afeard.
That any purblind eye may find it out.
The utter loss of all the realm of France.
You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.
The mind of Talbot, as you did mistake
My tender years, and let us not forego
Are often welcomest when they are gone.
Or been reguerdon'd with so much as thanks,
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,
Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord:
As plays the sun upon the glassy streams,
Approves her fit for none but for a king:
Prosper our colours in this dangerous fight!
Stand back, thou manifest conspirator,
And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.
And with submissive loyalty of heart
Than yet can be imagined or supposed.
Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss
And his achievements of no less account:
But tell me whom thou seek'st.
Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?
Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?
What means his grace, that he hath changed his style?
By sight of these our baleful enemies.
Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,
That, in regard King Henry gives consent,
But prosper better than the Trojan did.
An earl I am, and Suffolk am I call'd.
And so shall you,
And with my nails digg'd stones out of the ground,
Here in my scabbard, meditating that
And yet, in substance and authority,
Take, therefore, shipping, post, my lord, to France,
Were but his picture left amongst you here,
Tendering my ruin and assail'd of none,
To hold your slaughtering hands and keep the peace.
As princes do their courts, when they are cloy'd
God is our fortress, in whose conquering name
Of the most bloody nurser of his harms!
If any noise or soldier you perceive
One that still motions war and never peace,
He beckons with his hand and smiles on me.
Which thou thyself hast given her woful breast.
SCENE II. France. Plains in Anjou.
Let him perceive how ill we brook his treason
What! shall we curse the planets of mishap
But now thy uncle is removing hence:
He may mean more than we poor men do know:
If with a lady of so high resolve
So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench
That doth belong unto the house of York,
When I have chased all thy foes from hence,
Here they fight
That is her ransom, I deliver her,
A braver soldier never couched lance,
I'll be so bold to take what they have left.
God speed the parliament! who shall be the speaker?
The regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly.
Hark! by the sound of drum you may perceive
The day begins to break, and night is fled,
Deck'd with five flower-de-luces on each side,
Moved with compassion of my country's wreck,
Exeunt
And so was mine, my lord.
To join with witches and the help of hell!
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.
Will not your honours bear me company?
Do pelt so fast at one another's pate
From whence you spring by lineal descent.
Divinest creature, Astraea's daughter,
The plot is laid: if all things fall out right,
No princely commendations to my king?
A dower, my lords! disgrace not so your king,
Rome shall remedy this.
RICHARD
Confirm it so, mine honourable lord.
Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both:
Your kingdom's terror and black Nemesis?
Thou shalt be placed as viceroy under him,
Although you break it when your pleasure serves.
I'll call for pen and ink, and write my mind.
To fight with Talbot: as he march'd along,
We and our wives and children all will fight
Combat with adverse planets in the heavens!
Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,
I'll never trouble you, if I may spy them.
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
No treachery, but want of men and money.
Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,
What chance is this that suddenly hath cross'd us?
And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
And he is welcome. What! is this the man?
And spurn in pieces posts of adamant:
Frenchmen, I'll be a Salisbury to you:
'Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt
But Margaret, that is daughter to a king?
They want their porridge and their fat bull-beeves:
Now beat them hence, why do you let them stay?
After some respite will return to Calais,
A maid! and be so martial!
And therefore haste I to the parliament,
And thus he would: Open your city gates,
Enter another Messenger
From thence to England, where I hope ere long
Hath gained thy daughter princely liberty.
Putting on a red rose
The morn that I was wedded to her mother.
And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen
Humphrey of Gloucester? If thou canst accuse,
Stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.
As by his smoothed brows it doth appear:
Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead:
Ten thousand French have ta'en the sacrament
Woman, do what thou canst to save our honours,
Duke of Alencon, this was your default,
Forbidden late to carry any weapon,
Accursed tower! accursed fatal hand
And try if they can gain your liberty.
To go about my preparation.
Or let a rebel lead you to your deaths?
Ay, night by night, in studying good for England,
As I in duty love my king and country!
No more, I say: if thou dost plead for him,
For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long.
And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
It is applied to a deathful wound.
But, to the matter that we have in hand:
What answer makes your grace to the rebels'
With him the husband of this lovely lady:
If you be ta'en, we then should see the bottom
Lay not thy hands on me, forbear, I say,
We are thy sovereign, Clifford, kneel again,
The people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy,
What, cardinal, is your priesthood grown peremptory?
And live alone as secret as I may.
But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,
Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize,
But thou shalt wear it as a herald's coat,
Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze!
For, were there hope to conquer them again,
Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air.
Trust nobody, for fear you be betray'd.
And like rich hangings in a homely house,
And set the triple crown upon his head:
Enter a Townsman of Saint Alban's, crying 'A miracle!'
I have perform'd my task and was espoused:
Or banished fair England's territories,
And all to have the noble duke alive.
I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience,
To dream on evil or to work my downfall.
Suffolk, ambassador for Henry King of England, that
These counties were the keys of Normandy.
And each of them had twenty times their power,
Call hither Clifford! bid him come amain,
What mean'st thou, Suffolk, tell me, what are these?
Away with them! let them be clapp'd up close.
Churchmen so hot? good uncle, hide such malice,
So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
And vows to crown himself in Westminster.
Or to the meanest groom.
I thank them for their tender loving care,
Edmund had issue, Roger Earl of March,
Sound a sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER,  CARDINAL, BUCKINGHAM, YORK, SOMERSET, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and the DUCHESS
The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales,
All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.
My accuser is my 'prentice, and when I did correct
Here comes the townsmen on procession,
I never read but England's kings have had
Mine is, an't please your grace, against John
Whose bookish rule hath pull'd fair England down.
Am I not witch'd like her? or thou not false like him?
SCENE X. Kent. IDEN's garden.
I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow
Paris is lost, the state of Normandy
Whate'er occasion keeps him from us now.
After them! nay, before them, if we can.
Before we make election, give me leave
As I intend, Clifford, to thrive to-day,
A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.
That he should die is worthy policy,
He dies, and makes no sign. O God, forgive him!
And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall:
It is enough, I'll think upon the questions:
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee!
The armourer and his man, to enter the lists,
With honour of his birthright to the crown.
In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
If this fellow be wise, he'll never call ye Jack
Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth
For Suffolk's duke, may he be suffocate,
From top of honour to disgrace's feet?
Now, lords, my choler being over-blown
Sufficeth that I have maintains my state
Farewell, good king: when I am dead and gone,
The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.
How they affect the house and claim of York.
The issue of the next son should have reign'd.
All happiness unto my lord the king!
Exit
In sight of God and us, your guilt is great:
Behoves it us to labour for the realm.
Come, let's be gone.
but the ten meals I have lost, and I'll defy them
To see how God in all his creatures works!
Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride,
Because the king, forsooth, will have it so.
Sirrah, call in my sons to be my bail,
Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.
justices of peace, to call poor men before them
Why, Warwick, who should do the duke to death?
Thy heaven is on earth, thine eyes and thoughts
Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech,
Than where castles mounted stand.
I was, an't like your majesty.
Cade more: I think he hath a very fair warning.
I have heard her reported to be a woman of an
My lord protector will, I doubt it not,
I do believe that violent hands were laid
Him caper upright like a wild Morisco,
To force a spotless virgin's chastity,
We'll both together lift our heads to heaven,
With all the learned council of the realm,
Was better worth than all my father's lands,
gaols and let out the prisoners.
We have dispatch'd the duke, as he commanded.
Sound drums and trumpets, and to London all:
Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon,
Because my book preferr'd me to the king,
city's cost, the pissing-conduit run nothing but
Obey, audacious traitor, kneel for grace.
That winter lion, who in rage forgets
I thank thee, Clifford: say, what news with thee?
In sight of England and her lordly peers,
Can you not see? or will ye not observe
Ah, uncle Humphrey! in thy face I see
Because here is a man accused of treason:
And even with this I lost fair England's view
Our simple supper ended, give me leave
For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
protector.
Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone:
That Maine which by main force Warwick did win,
For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with
Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah,
And stolest away the ladies' hearts of France,
'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him.
Give up your staff, sir, and the king his realm.
And furthermore, well have the Lord Say's head for
The uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms
O, where is faith? O, where is loyalty?
Even so remorseless have they borne him hence,
Was rightful heir unto the English crown
That York is most unmeet of any man.
At your pleasure, my good lord. Who's within
She'll hamper thee, and dandle thee like a baby:
SCENE I. Saint Alban's.
Of capital treason 'gainst the king and crown,
A man that ne'er saw in his life before.
He'll wrest the sense and hold us here all day:
Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, and
Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her youngest days.
Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal:
no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have
And here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour:
Moreover, thou hast put them in prison, and because
May readily be stopp'd.
Edward the Black Prince died before his father
And heir apparent to the English crown:
That dims the honour of this warlike isle!
That slanders me with murder's crimson badge.
Alarum and retreat. Enter CADE and all his rabblement
How now, madam!
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland,
How I have loved my king and commonweal:
Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my powers.
First 'Prentice	Here, Peter, I drink to thee: and be not afraid.
Exeunt
Go, call our uncle to our presence straight,
Had Henry got an empire by his marriage,
If he be guilty, as 'tis published.
Who is there?
So the poor chicken should be sure of death.
Ah, villain, thou wilt betray me, and get a thousand
And let us all to meditation.
And hardly understood.
Dread lord, the commons send you word by me,
And sooner dance upon a bloody pole
thy sovereign.
My Nell, I take my leave: and, master sheriff,
But that thou art so fast mine enemy.
Doth any one accuse York for a traitor?
The duke was dumb and could not speak a word.
Beaufort's red sparkling eyes blab his heart's malice,
Go, speak not to me, even now be gone.
I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly:
With 'God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!'
He shall not breathe infection in this air
Thou wouldst not have mourn'd so much for me.
Be brave, then, for your captain is brave, and vows
pot, shall have ten hoops and I will make it felony
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And so should these, if I might have my will.
I prithee, peace, good queen,
Go, take hence that traitor from our sight,
Ay, kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt
And when I start, the envious people laugh
For, till thou speak, thou shalt not pass from hence.
indeed, only for that cause they have been most
The mutual conference that my mind hath had,
SCENE IV. A street.
Than where castles mounted stand.'
O heavenly God!
Show me one scar character'd on thy skin:
Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable
Beldam, I think we watch'd you at an inch.
The trust I have is in mine innocence,
[Within]  An answer from the king, my
Now have at him!
To heave the traitor Somerset from hence,
on a pole, or no. Take him away, and behead him.
Well, for this night we will repose us here:
True, uncle.
the parliament of England.
But you, my lord, were glad to be employ'd,
Yet, by reputing of his high descent,
shall be the last of the next month. Come,
And, being a woman, I will not be slack
They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humour,
Say we intend to try his grace to-day.
If thou be'st death, I'll give thee England's treasure,
And so say I.
Strangers in court do take her for the queen:
To blush and beautify the cheek again.
Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the garden
Saint Alban's battle won by famous York
Madam, sit you and fear not: whom we raise,
Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock
Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemy?
To show how quaint an orator you are:
I pray, my lords, let me compound this strife.
Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let's march
Thump! then see thou thump thy master well.
Anjou and Maine are given to the French,
To keep by policy what Henry got?
Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!
Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,
My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best,
Was I for this nigh wreck'd upon the sea
On which I'll toss the flower-de-luce of France.
A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.
Alive again? then show me where he is:
How now! is Jack Cade slain?
Hath not essentially but by circumstance
The agent of thy foul inconstancy,
Exeunt some of them
Exeunt
But then AEneas bare a living load,
Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?
Away, my lord! you are slow, for shame, away!
I have great matters to impart to thee.
Anjou and Maine! myself did win them both,
beadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.
As one that surfeits thinking on a want.
Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb?
Enter the WARWICK and SALISBURY
God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
Where it best fits to be, in Henry's hand.
Now, by God's mother, priest, I'll shave your crown for this,
Look on my George, I am a gentleman:
The Nevils are thy subjects to command.
The map of honour, truth and loyalty:
To give the enemy way, and to secure us
And over-joy of heart doth minister.
He dares not calm his contumelious spirit
What! did my brother Henry spend his youth,
Believe me, cousin Gloucester,
And I    and now we three have spoke it,
Against this proud protector, with my sword!
And, in the end being rescued, I have seen
I cannot blame them all: what is't to them?
The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester,
O graceless men! they know not what they do.
shift for one, and so, God's curse light upon you
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
For seeing him I see my life in death.
There let his head and lifeless body lie,
Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood
My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take up
A subtle traitor needs no sophister.
His weapons holy saws of sacred writ,
Free from a stubborn opposite intent,
But still remember what the Lord hath done.
If he revenge it not, yet will his friends,
What seest thou in me, York? why dost thou pause?
Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought up
And think it but a minute spent in sport.
The time when screech-owls cry and ban-dogs howl,
They'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.
Dies
Too full of foolish pity, and Gloucester's show
Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch:
William of Windsor was the seventh and last.
By means whereof the towns each day revolted.
And my consent ne'er ask'd herein before!
And with your best endeavour have stirr'd up
let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me
Asmath,
ACT III
To pry into the secrets of the state,
Come you, my lord, to see my open shame?
Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me,
'Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.
To show some reason, of no little force,
Loather a hundred times to part than die.
Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?
The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Bretagne and Alencon,
But left that hateful office unto thee:
Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase,
As who, my lord?
What, is't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine:
Let them obey that know not how to rule,
The title of this most renowned duke,
The commons, like an angry hive of bees
This is the day appointed for the combat,
You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.
Ay, ay, farewell, thy office is discharged.
Long sitting to determine poor men's causes
For things are often spoke and seldom meant:
And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
It may be judged I made the duke away,
And where thou art not, desolation.
Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death,
To think upon my pomp shall be my hell.
Alarums. MATTHEW GOFFE is slain, and all the rest. Then enter CADE, with his company.
What, and wouldst climb a tree?
John Cade of Ashford,
Advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine,
reformation. There shall be in England seven
Hath my sword therefore broke through London gates,
Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,
Up Fish Street! down Saint Magnus' Corner! Kill
Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim?
Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
[Aside]  Cold news for me, for I had hope of France
The reverent care I bear unto my lord
He is arrested, but will not obey,
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,
As I have read, laid claim unto the crown,
What say ye, countrymen? will ye relent,
and delight to live in slavery to the nobility. Let
SCENE II. Saint Alban's.
Or Somerset or York, all's one to me.
For blessed are the peacemakers on earth.
Methinks already in this civil broil
Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem,
Come, come, let's fall in with them.
Mother Jourdain, be you
'Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?
Who being accused a crafty murderer,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
And care not who they sting in his revenge.
Gaultier or Walter, which it is, I care not:
My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.
What of that?
honour be witness, that no want of resolution in me.
For losing ken of Albion's wished coast.
Here is a hand to hold a sceptre up
Hath clapp'd his tail between his legs and cried:
Away with him, I say! hang him with his pen and
Ay, good my lord, for purposely therefore
Yet so he ruled and such a prince he was
In any case, be not too rough in terms,
So good a quarrel and so bad a peer.
that I can write my name.
No more of him, for I will deal with him
And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,
And there cut off thy most ungracious head,
Give up thy staff: Henry will to himself
the commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.
I shall not want false witness to condemn me,
The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet,
I have a suit unto your lordship.
To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk,
Were by his side, sometime he calls the king,
Now fetch me a stool hither by and by. Now, sirrah,
Shall lose his head for his presumption.
Do or undo, as if ourself were here.
Will you not, sons?
For you shall sup with Jesu Christ to-night.
Enter GLOUCESTER and his DUCHESS
Here they fight. CADE falls
Away! though parting be a fretful corrosive,
And yet, I think, jet did he never see.
His well-proportion'd beard made rough and rugged,
Until they hear the order of his death.
That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death.
Thy name is Gaultier, being rightly sounded.
SCENE I. Fields between Dartford and Blackheath.
To sup with me to-morrow night. Away!
house, and lands, and wife and all, from me.
and leave us.
Exeunt
Will make him say I moved him to those arms.
Hide not thy poison with such sugar'd words,
Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the king
Exit
A jewel, lock'd into the wofull'st cask
Am I a queen in title and in style,
Rancour will out: proud prelate, in thy face
I am content: provide me soldiers, lords,
Which time will bring to light in smooth
And all the peers and nobles of the realm
I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy,
SCENE III. The palace.
His eye-balls further out than when he lived,
Christendom. If thou hadst been born blind, thou
Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.
rightful heir to the crown?
Then linger not, my lord, away, take horse.
Or is he but retired to make him strong?
Yet AEolus would not be a murderer,
Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,
How often have I tempted Suffolk's tongue,
[Reads]  'Imprimis, it is agreed between the French
He never would have stay'd in France so long.
For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook
Here in our presence! dare you be so bold?
Exeunt GLOUCESTER and Messenger
The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.
This they have promised, to show your highness
And mere instinct of love and loyalty,
Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love,
With thy confederates in this weighty cause.
O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long?
Whether your grace be worthy, yea or no,
It is reported, mighty sovereign,
Dies
Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to,
But great men tremble when the lion roars,
That Somerset be sent as regent thither:
Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?
but I say, 'tis the bee's wax, for I did but seal
SCENE II. GLOUCESTER'S house.
Nay, then, this spark will prove a raging fire,
To present your highness with the man.
And must be made a subject to a duke?
venture so.
Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I--
Exit Servant with PETER
In my opinion yet thou seest not well.
Ah! sancta majestas, who would not buy thee dear?
Unlike the ruler of a commonweal.
Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious gold.
By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France,
So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.
And will they undertake to do me good?
Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,
And shakes his head and trembling stands aloof,
And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades
Did bear him like a noble gentleman.
I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men,
Go to, sirrah, tell the king from me, that, for his
Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart
Enter SUFFOLK
France should have torn and rent my very heart,
And in her heart she scorns our poverty:
According to that state you shall be used.
By false accuse doth level at my life:
Ah, Humphrey, this dishonour in thine age
Ah, countrymen! if when you make your prayers,
As the Spirit speaks, SOUTHWELL writes the answer
not peep: an if thou darest,
With sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.
Seven earls, twelve barons and twenty reverend bishops,
witness of this: therefore I beseech your majesty,
Base dunghill villain and mechanical,
Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,
Lordings, farewell, and say, when I am gone,
Tell me, sirrah, what's my name?
performance of your promises.
Reading out of a paper
It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.
Makes him oppose himself against his king.
Lo, I present your grace a traitor's head,
And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,
And if mine arm be heaved in the air,
Re-enter SUFFOLK
And well such losers may have leave to speak.
Crown'd by the name of Henry the Fourth,
And never live but true unto his liege!
So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I say it
With his new bride and England's dear-bought queen,
Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style
Succeed before the younger, I am king.
Uncle, how now!
Far truer spoke than meant: I lose, indeed,
By her I claim the kingdom: she was heir
How long hast thou been blind?
am the besom that must sweep the court clean of such
Stabb'd Julius Caesar, savage islanders
And, when I spy advantage, claim the crown,
My masters of Saint Alban's, have you not beadles in
Makes them thus forward in his banishment.
When he to madding Dido would unfold
dog's-leather of.
Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any
bricklayer.
To grapple with the house of Lancaster,
An't like your lordly lord-protectorship.
And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee!
Seems he a dove? his feathers are but borrowed,
And in this private plot be we the first
Exit
They fight, and CLIFFORD falls
Has a book in his pocket with red letters in't.
Nor change my countenance for this arrest:
Of Salisbury, who can report of him,
To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son.
I can express no kinder sign of love
O miserable age! virtue is not regarded in handicrafts-men.
Should raise so great a power without his leave,
Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.
Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.
First let my words stab him, as he hath me.
cunning to be great, that could restore this cripple
To die in ruffian battle? Even at this sight
That doth accuse his master of high treason:
Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!
Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach?
God knows how long it is I have to live,
Are brazen images of canonized saints.
Hume's knavery will be the duchess' wreck,
She gives the DUCHESS a box on the ear
Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless:
I cannot give due action to my words,
mayor's sword borne before us.
This evening, on the east side of the grove.
A heart it was, bound in with diamonds,
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded,
Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colours
So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss
Where shall it find a harbour in the earth?
A poor esquire of Kent, that loves his king.
The gaudy, blabbing and remorseful day
Reads
To give his censure: these are no women's matters.
SCENE II. Bury St. Edmund's. A room of state.
The Dauphin hath prevail'd beyond the seas,
Aside to GLOUCESTER
That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true,
How in our voiding lobby hast thou stood
Kent from me, she hath lost her best man, and exhort
I thank you, good people: there shall be no money,
Pride went before, ambition follows him.
[Aside]  Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable,
Have I affected wealth or honour? speak.
A wilderness is populous enough,
By what we can, which can no more but fly.
Me seemeth then it is no policy,
I prophesied France will be lost ere long.
With ruder terms, such as my wit affords
The cardinal's not my better in the field.
I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocks
Died he not in his bed? where should he die?
Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain,
His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.
So, sirs: now go some and pull down the Savoy,
This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,
I'll be the first, sure.
Thy cruelty in execution
Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban's shrine,
Till Henry be more weak and I more strong,--
Where death's approach is seen so terrible!
O master, that you could!
Watch thou and wake when others be asleep,
I care not whither, for I beg no favour,
This was my dream: what it doth bode, God knows.
For in the shade of death I shall find joy,
Talking of hawking, nothing else, my lord.
Who hateth him and honours not his father,
bravely marching, it hath served me instead of a
Base slave, thy words are blunt and so art thou.
And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best.
Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
Enter three or four Petitioners, PETER, the Armourer's man, being one
So will the queen, that living held him dear.
To cease! Wast thou ordain'd, dear father,
Under the countenance and confederacy
Re-enter GLOUCESTER
Such as by God's book are adjudged to death.
For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead,
Swear like a ruffian and demean himself
Sir Humphrey Stafford and h is brother's death
Sole daughter unto Lionel Duke of Clarence:
Flourish
Henry hath money, you are strong and manly,
She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged.
Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon.
I seek not to wax great by others' waning,
Go tell this heavy message to the king.
He that is truly dedicate to war
See, how the pangs of death do make him grin!
You have defended me from imminent death.
Upon thine honour, is he prisoner?
In cruelty will I seek out my fame.
I muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come:
To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans.
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown.
Whose church-like humours fits not for a crown.
And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine!
And to survey his dead and earthly image,
The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.
[Aside]  Then we are like to have biting statutes,
As for your spiteful false objections,
From treason's secret knife and traitors' rage
me in capite, and we charge and command that their
As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.
Exit, bearing off his father
Knock him down there.
Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair,
Re-enter WARWICK and others, bearing GLOUCESTER'S body on a bed
must serve me to feed on.
For single combat in convenient place,
the Tower, to defend the city from the rebels.
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.
For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.
Was't I! yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman:
'Tis meet that lucky ruler be employ'd,
And chop away that factious pate of his.
To look into this business thoroughly
Enter YORK
He being of age to govern of himself?
KING HENRY VI swoons
Fight: excursions. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and others
Nor stir at nothing till the axe of death
I thought King Henry had resembled thee
From meaning treason to our royal person
Under the which is writ 'Invitis nubibus.'
I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted,
O, let me view his visage, being dead,
Run to my Lord of Suffolk, let him know
For, being green, there is great hope of help.
His eldest sister, Anne,
I will, my lord. Come on, sirrah, off with your
Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.
And I am sent to tell his majesty
To emblaze the honour that thy master got.
Blaspheming God and cursing men on earth.
Deliver up my title in the queen
And Humphrey is no little man in England.
Ay, what else? fear you not her courage.
Away! be gone.
And show'd how well you love your prince and country:
Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock
These few days' wonder will be quickly worn.
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Master's-Mate	And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.
Is to remove proud Somerset from the king,
I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman,
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
And wedded be thou to the hags of hell,
But I will remedy this gear ere long,
one and twenty fifteens, and one shilling to the
this world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give thee
Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight!
over this stool and run away.
better told.
Yet do not go away: come, basilisk,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence' house,
Which darest not, no, nor canst not rule a traitor.
Yes, my good lord, I'll follow presently.
That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey:
Seeing his dead father
This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom.
Their chiefest prospect murdering basilisks!
Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous:
Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest,
According as I gave directions?
Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.
Give him a box o' the ear and that will make 'em red again.
God on our side, doubt not of victory.
With Sir John Stanley, in the Isle of Man.
How often hast thou waited at my cup,
The rampant bear chain'd to the ragged staff,
For that's the golden mark I seek to hit:
And Dick the Butcher,--
To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief,
And bear the name and port of gentlemen?
The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.
Thither go these news, as fast as horse can
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell:
And charity chased hence by rancour's hand,
Sometimes he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghost
some more towns in France. Soldiers, defer the
Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
that am a butcher.
Immediately he was upon his knee,
Enter HUME
And you that be the king's friends, follow me.
To SUFFOLK
gear the sooner the better.
Enter IDEN, with CADE'S head
houses over your heads, ravish your wives and
Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,
Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure?
Until thy head be circled with the same.
The honourable blood of Lancaster,
His hands abroad display'd, as one that grasp'd
So bad a death argues a monstrous life.
Lord of York's armour.
The servant of this armourer, my lords.
That e'er I proved thee false or fear'd thy faith.
Nor wear the diadem upon his head,
The silver livery of advised age,
And torture him with grievous lingering death.
And his advantage following your decease,
him for his fault the other day, he did vow upon his
plain-dealing man?
Peter! what more?
Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth mule
yet.
As being thought to contradict your liking,
This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts.
As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave:
but I'll bridle it: he shall die, an it be but for
And, at his pleasure, will resign my place.
To signify that rebels there are up
Rise up Sir John Mortimer.
Enter a Messenger
For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.
Cold news, Lord Somerset: but God's will be done!
Enter a Messenger
He knits his brow and shows an angry eye,
Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's insolence,
claret wine this first year of our reign. And now
them again, lest they consult about the giving up of
I banish her my bed and company
Iden, kneel down.
He will be found a dangerous protector.
these arms till you had recovered your ancient
Re-enter WHITMORE with SUFFOLK's body
Like to a ship that, having 'scaped a tempest,
I know, ere they will have me go to ward,
To France, to France, and get what you have lost,
But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?
Born blind, an't please your grace.
While all is shared and all is borne away,
Here, sir.
Heart's discontent and sour affliction
And show itself, attire me how I can.
When have I aught exacted at your hands,
So that, by this, you would not have him die.
What have we here?
My noble father,
See if thou canst outface me with thy looks:
You men of Kent,--
And as the dam runs lowing up and down,
Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart:
Who, with their drowsy, slow and flagging wings,
me other than Lord Mortimer.
ear can endure to hear. Thou hast appointed
Henceforth I will not have to do with pity:
Say, man, were these thy words?
Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man,
But still, where danger was, still there I met him,
Come, my masters, the duchess, I tell you, expects
Uneath may she endure the flinty streets,
Exit BUCKINGHAM
was never merry world in England since gentlemen came up.
As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.
And, for my wife, I know not how it stands,
And William de la Pole, first duke of Suffolk.
Made me collect these dangers in the duke.
Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst have
My staff? here, noble Henry, is my staff:
No marvel, an it like your majesty,
Is my apparel sumptuous to behold?
I will stir up in England some black storm
See how the blood is settled in his face.
Ask what thou wilt. That I had said and done!
They know their master loves to be aloft,
Then, York, unloose thy long-imprison'd thoughts,
I thought as much, he would be above the clouds.
Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade,
And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
No, my lord, nor likely to be slain, for they have
'Tis York that hath more reason for his death.
With Eleanor, for telling but her dream?
Suffolk concluded on the articles,
one.
'What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?'
Exit HUME
shall be encountered with a man as good as himself:
SCENE III. Another part of Blackheath.
Even to affright thee with the view thereof.
And thou that smiledst at good Duke Humphrey's death,
Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn queen.
Until the golden circuit on my head,
He kneels
Staring full ghastly like a strangled man,
'Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France,
And so am I, my name is Walter Whitmore.
Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal,
What's his name?
Where are you there? Sir John! nay, fear not, man,
Be full expired. Thanks, uncle Winchester,
Great King of England and my gracious lord,
And henceforward all things shall be in common.
Or all my fence shall fail.
[Aside]  But now of late, notable to travel with her
Did he not, contrary to form of law,
Enter SALISBURY
For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.
'twere come to that!
That were a state fit for his holiness.
Enter a Post
Sirs, what's o'clock?
How fares my gracious lord?
What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him,
When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.
And he that brings his head unto the king
Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons,
Unless it were a bloody murderer,
they have been up these two days.
And good reason, for thereby is England mained, and
Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?
My mother, being heir unto the crown
While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.
Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.
This day I'll wear aloft my burgonet,
And if we did but glance a far-off look,
Might I but know thee by thy household badge.
Whose overweening arm I have pluck'd back,
Tut, this was nothing but an argument
do not cast away an honest man for a villain's
Exit
And with the southern clouds contend in tears,
My body round engirt with misery,
She's tickled now, her fume needs no spurs,
I am able to endure much.
[Aside]  But methinks he should stand in fear of
Thy grave is digg'd already in the earth.
Is utterly bereft you, all is lost.
off his head presently, and then break into his
A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!
As curst, as harsh and horrible to hear,
Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint,
Nay, then, he is a conjurer.
Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell,
Exeunt KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and SUFFOLK
But then are we in order when we are most
But all his mind is bent to holiness,
O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones,
For I myself must hunt this deer to death.
instigation, to prove him a knave and myself an
Their music frightful as the serpent's hiss,
And so, farewell, for I must hence again.
in France, Before--
Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.
Cut both the villains' throats, for die you shall:
At Bristol I expect my soldiers,
And all by thee. Away! convey him hence.
Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep,
I do beseech your royal majesty,
To lose thy youth in peace, and to achieve
Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.
Until the queen his mistress bury it.
Assure yourselves, will never be unkind:
It made me laugh to see the villain run.
Here comes my lord.
till I do come to London, where we will have the
commons of Melford.' How now, sir knave!
The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose,
Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close,
Therefore away with us to Killingworth.
I desire no more.
Which I will bear in triumph to the king,
because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
You do it her: and so, Sir John, farewell!
The abject people gazing on thy face,
that the duchies of Anjou and Maine shall be
Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.
Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly,
feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour.
I will subscribe and say I wrong'd the duke.
Ere you can take due orders for a priest:
Ay, all you have laid your heads together--
Shame and confusion! all is on the rout,
Look after him and cannot do him good,
Your deeds of war and all our counsel die?
Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.
worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost thou not?
on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute, there
Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out.
The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all,
Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart,
towards London.
My Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise,
Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.
God's name. Go, take him away, I say, and strike
unless his teeth be pulled out.
The rightful heir to England's royal seat.
Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
The commons haply rise, to save his life,
furred pack, she washes bucks here at home.
And caterpillars eat my leaves away,
Hath given the duchy of Anjou and Maine
name the several colours we do wear. Sight may
And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,
In all submission and humility
No more will I their babes: tears virginal
Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ.
And ask him what's the reason of these arms.
I never saw a fellow worse bested,
That slily glided towards your majesty,
knees he would be even with me: I have good
I summon your grace to his majesty's parliament,
And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,
And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame,
Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil.
And put the Englishmen unto the sword:
Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails.
Saunder Simpcox, an if it please you, master.
Dealing with witches and with conjurers:
Then thus:
Too true, and bought his climbing very dear.
And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.
By nature proved an enemy to the flock,
Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.
How art thou call'd? and what is thy degree?
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death?
[Aside]  Or rather, of stealing a cade of herrings.
Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
them break your backs with burthens, take your
I never saw but Humphrey Duke of Gloucester
Shall be their father's bail, and bane to those
Enter the DUCHESS aloft, HUME following
Reads
Say'st thou me so? What colour is this cloak of?
But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
God save the king! God save the king!
Blotting your names from books of memory,
That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard:
And dimm'd mine eyes, that I can read no further.
Let me see thine eyes: wink now: now open them:
Poor soul, God's goodness hath been great to thee:
Why, what tumultuous clamour have we here?
With her that hateth thee and hates us all,
The king hath sent him, sure: I must dissemble.
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.
Then, nobly, York, 'tis for a crown thou fight'st.
to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave me
That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him?
SCENE VIII. Southwark.
Ready to starve and dare not touch his own:
Re-enter YOUNG CLIFFORD
of Anjou and the county of Maine shall be released
Beshrew the winners, for they play'd me false!
What tidings with our cousin Buckingham?
Shall be eternized in all age to come.
And Humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars:
Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.
My father was a Mortimer,--
all the country is laid for me, but now am I so
but only my followers' base and ignominious
the said Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret,
The false revolting Normans thorough thee
And, had I first been put to speak my mind,
Hold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.
And yield to mercy whilst 'tis offer'd you,
That shall salute our rightful sovereign
Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.
Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
needs be hanged with your pardons about your necks?
counsellor, or no?
I have.
And thought thee happy when I shook my head?
Meet me to-morrow in St. George's field,
The ancient proverb will be well effected:
And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
In craving your opinion of my title,
Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?
The rascal people, thirsting after prey,
all, it is impossible. My lords, Saint Alban here
Rear up his body, wring him by the nose.
Which I will win from France, or else be slain,
We shall begin our ancient bickerings.
Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men!
Anjou and Maine both given unto the French!
They kill him
In thine own person answer thy abuse.
I'll give it, sir, and therefore spare my life.
Exit SALISBURY
[Within]  An answer from the king, or we will all break in!
Although we fancy not the cardinal,
But William of Hatfield died without an heir.
My lord, I have consider'd with myself
Till Lionel's issue fails, his should not reign:
Trow'st thou that e'er I'll look upon the world,
Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away
So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
Nay, be not angry, I am pleased again.
there, ho!
Ay, marry, will we, therefore get ye gone.
Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee,
Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man,
That those which fly before the battle ends
supplication?
They say 'A crafty knave does need no broker,'
For judgment only doth belong to thee.
So, in the famous ancient city, Tours,
The secrets of his overcharged soul,
As if she had suborned some to swear
O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
What counsel give you in this weighty cause?
hungry that if I might have a lease of my life for a
And Smith the weaver,--
I would invent as bitter-searching terms,
Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice,
And that your majesty was a usurper.
And therefore to revenge it, shalt thou die,
Troubles the silver spring where England drinks.
My troublous dream this night doth make me sad.
SCENE V. London. The Tower.
Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.
With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed,
ACT I
For costs and charges in transporting her!
Peace, son! and show some reason, Buckingham,
I have thought upon it, it shall be so. Away, burn
For underneath an alehouse' paltry sign,
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.
False allegations to o'erthrow his state?
while, which is not amiss to cool a man's stomach
And as the butcher takes away the calf
Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons:
To call a present court of parliament.
Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands:
All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen,
And all to make away my guiltless life.
It were but necessary you were waked,
Fling up his cap, and say 'God save his majesty!'
The purest spring is not so free from mud
all. Wither, garden, and be henceforth a
You do prepare to ride unto Saint Alban's,
If York, with all his far-fet policy,
Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Can I make men live, whether they will or no?
Thou shall be waking well I shed thy blood,
Or count them happy that enjoy the sun?
And I'll provide his executioner,
Where's our general?
Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash.
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Enter the DUCHESS in a white sheet, and a taper  burning in her hand, with STANLEY, the Sheriff, and Officers
Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his
Shall be the surety for their traitor father.
Which with the heart there cools and ne'er returneth
Exeunt
For, as I hear, the king is fled to London,
SCENE I. The coast of Kent.
Some stern untutor'd churl, and noble stock
Mort Dieu!
Dead in his bed, my lord, Gloucester is dead.
Death, at whose name I oft have been afear'd,
Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself!
Exeunt
Are my chests fill'd up with extorted gold?
Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,
Salisbury, and Warwick,
our supplications in the quill.
What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?
Injurious duke, that threatest where's no cause.
Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor!
And take my heart with thee.
It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.
Where wert thou born?
Silence!
Knowing that thou wouldst have me drown'd on shore,
Methought I sat in seat of majesty
Walter,--
By the eternal God, whose name and power
But, as I think, it was by the cardinal,
Have cost a mass of public treasury.
Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves,
that he was, and that the king was an usurper.
I'll tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet:
But all in vain are these mean obsequies,
[Aside]  And so says York, for he hath greatest cause.
Looking the way her harmless young one went,
If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick.
Run back and bite, because he was withheld,
Alas, my lord, hang me, if ever I spake the words.
Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy,
A plague upon them! wherefore should I curse them?
But that my heart's on future mischief set,
If those that care to keep your royal person
Yes, my lord, if it please your grace.
commodities upon our bills?
Is able with the change to kill and cure.
The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham,
Here let them end it, and God defend the right!
To send me packing with an host of men:
it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord Say
The commons hast thou rack'd, the clergy's bags
drink, and fear not your man.
Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.
Lord Say, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.
Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows,
No.
As more at large your grace shall understand.
Be counterpoised with such a petty sum!
Emmanuel.
Invite my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick
And make my image but an alehouse sign.
Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal,
Stand, villain, stand, or I'll fell thee down. He
Ay, but these rags are no part of the duke:
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders,
But you have done more miracles than I,
What say'st thou? majesty! I am but grace.
If you go forward, therefore yield, or die.
Thy deeds, thy plainness and thy housekeeping,
Descend to darkness and the burning lake!
king Charles, and William de la Pole, Marquess of
Exit
Ay, sir.
I'll yield myself to prison willingly,
The sight of me is odious in their eyes,
Enter YORK, SALISBURY, and WARWICK
And so to arms, victorious father,
Away, base cullions! Suffolk, let them go.
Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness!
With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
Enter MICHAEL
Virtue is choked with foul ambition
And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.
Wouldst have me kneel? first let me ask of these,
Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,
a verb, and such abominable words as no Christian
Now, sirs, have you dispatch'd this thing?
For I am bold to counsel you in this.
And what we do establish he confirms:
York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.
Of Lady Eleanor, the protector's wife,
Pompey the Great, and Suffolk dies by pirates.
Upon his face an ocean of salt tears,
But I must make fair weather yet a while,
So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain.
Dispatch: this knave's tongue begins to double.
'Tis thine they give away, and not their own.
Flourish. Exeunt
Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.
That hath dishonour'd Gloucester's honest name.
That speaks he knows not what?
As by your high imperial majesty
What, worse than nought? nay, then, a shame take all!
Jerusalem, and crown her Queen of England ere the
But fly you must, uncurable discomfit
Exeunt above DUCHESS and HUME, guarded
And it hath pleased him that three times to-day
'Tis, my good lord.
My lord, there's an army gathered together in
O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!
Lord bless me! I pray God! for I am never able to
If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with:
Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.
But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.
Sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants!
by this means
O'er him whom heaven created for thy ruler.
How now, my lords!
what is thine?
carry them:
Exit Herald
And here commit you to my lord cardinal
And lowly words were ransom for their fault.
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight,
By good Saint Alban, who said, 'Simpcox, come,
Under the surly Gloucester's governance?
But match to match I have encounter'd him
But be thou mild and blush not at my shame,
be made parchment? that parchment, being scribbled
To Ireland will you lead a band of men,
His insolence is more intolerable
Brave peers of England, pillars of the state,
As guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.
a fig for Peter!
Myself and Beaufort had him in protection,
On any ground that I am ruler of,
My Lord of Gloucester, now ye grow too hot:
giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu, the
In England work your grace's full content.
God forbid any malice should prevail,
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
Without discharge, money, or furniture,
Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me.
The pride of Suffolk and the cardinal,
more of your matter before the King.
Enter RICHARD and SOMERSET to fight. SOMERSET is killed
Well, so it stands, and thus, I fear, at last
honour, unless I find him guilty, he shall not die.
And what of that?
Brave thee! ay, by the best blood that ever was
My lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hope
O that it were to do! What have we done?
Pity was all the fault that was in me,
To see their day and them our fortune give:
upon London-stone, I charge and command that, of the
And greatness of his place be grief to us,
And never mount to trouble you again.
Might in thy palace perish Margaret.
His arms are only to remove from thee
In face, in gait, in speech, he doth resemble:
I'll give a thousand pound to look upon him.
In bringing them to civil discipline,
SCENE III. A bedchamber.
His study is his tilt-yard, and his loves
I go of message from the queen to France,
With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch,
No, stir not, for your lives, let her pass by.
Alas, master, I know not.
Great men have reaching hands: oft have I struck
Yet I do find it so, for to be plain,
Why, then from Ireland come I with my strength
And made a prey for carrion kites and crows
As pledges of my fealty and love,
Full often, like a shag-hair'd crafty kern,
If, after three days' space, thou here be'st found
With humble suit: no, rather let my head
Your grief, the common grief of all the land.
This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world,
make it good.
She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.
That ever did contain a thing of worth.
But can do more in England than the king.
Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster,
And should you fall, he as the next will mount.
Which is infallible, to England's crown.
But if thy arms be to no other end,
If Somerset be unworthy of the place,
And makes it fearful and degenerate,
Or gather wealth, I care not, with what envy:
Can chase away the first-conceived sound?
And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.
Now, by the death of Him that died for all,
And can do nought but wail her darling's loss,
That all your interest in those territories
Except a sword or sceptre balance it:
Above the reach or compass of thy thought?
Yet must we join with him and with the lords,
common, and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to
and delivered to the king her father'--
was born to do me good: for many a time, but for a
But to maintain the king, the realm and you?
As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.
Ah, Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?
May, even in their wives' and children's sight,
Sometime I'll say, I am Duke Humphrey's wife,
And, in thy reverence and thy chair-days, thus
[Aside]  No question of that, for I have seen him
Is, that he was the lord ambassador
Enter BUCKINGHAM and CLIFFORD, attended
And therefore, by His majesty I swear,
We know the time since he was mild and affable,
For eighteen months concluded by consent.
'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace.
Uncle of Winchester, I pray, read on.
corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a
Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
Like to a duchess, and Duke Humphrey's lady,
If my suspect be false, forgive me, God,
'Tis meet he be condemn'd by course of law.
Thou darest not, for thy own.
While as the silly owner of the goods
Health and all happiness to my lord the king!
Upon thy eye-balls murderous tyranny
wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue can tell.
Tell me wherein have I offended most?
And shall these labours and these honours die?
Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains:
Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear,
Is Beaufort term'd a kite? Where are his talons?
To know the reason of these arms in peace,
See where they come: I'll warrant they'll
Being all descended to the labouring heart,
How insolent of late he is become,
Master Hume, we are therefore provided: will her
Enter BUCKINGHAM
You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?
His valour, coin and people, in the wars?
Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster,
Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,
I thank thee, Meg, these words content me much.
As wild Medea young Absyrtus did:
And grumbling York: and not the least of these
Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff,
To be a queen, and crown'd with infamy!
My mother a Plantagenet,--
[Aside]  I knew her well, she was a midwife.
Enchased with all the honours of the world?
With envious looks, laughing at thy shame,
Exeunt Wife, Beadle, Mayor,  and c
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
accusation.
Why, that's well said. What colour is my gown of?
Thunder and lightning. Exit Spirit
Gelidus timor occupat artus it is thee I fear.
Let me be blessed for the peace I make,
freedom: but you are all recreants and dastards,
and doublets.
Is it but thought so? what are they that think it?
Nay, answer, if you can: the Frenchmen are our
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears
Enter VAUX
Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquity's
Can we outrun the heavens? good Margaret, stay.
go hard with you.
She sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies,
Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,
This tongue hath parley'd unto foreign kings
Could send such message to their sovereign:
And I may live to do you kindness if
Or sell my title for a glorious grave.
For I should melt at an offender's tears,
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Marry, when thou darest.
Then let's make haste away, and look unto the main.
And comment then upon his sudden death.
Within this half-hour, hath received his sight,
[Kneeling]  Long live Queen Margaret, England's
Enter a Soldier, running
Pole!
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted!
Say he be taken, rack'd and tortured,
about matters they were not able to answer.
Causeless have laid disgraces on my head,
on a brick wall have I climbed into this garden, to
grammar school, and whereas, before, our forefathers
And now, like Ajax Telamonius,
Came he right now to sing a raven's note,
O, I am slain! famine and no other hath slain me:
Well, sir, we must have you find your legs. Sirrah
God's secret judgment: I did dream to-night
They use to write it on the top of letters: 'twill
he is but a knight, is a'?
Duke Humphrey has done a miracle to-day.
And yet herein I judge mine own wit good--
Unto the prince's heart of Calydon.
Home to your cottages, forsake this groom:
Enter a Servingman
Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?
And even now my burthen'd heart would break,
Who can be bound by any solemn vow
The world shall not be ransom for thy life.
The ringleader and head of all this rout,
These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.
SCENE III. A hall of justice.
And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,
But I am troubled here with them myself,
Bring me unto my trial when you will.
I see them lording it in London streets,
Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth.
Save to the God of heaven and to my king,
Honour and virtue and conversed with such
Duke Humphrey.
SCENE II. London. YORK'S garden.
My Lord of Somerset will keep me here,
Exeunt DUCHESS and other prisoners, guarded
Now, God be praised, that to believing souls
What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?
And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore,
When from St. Alban's we do make return,
As did AEneas old Anchises bear,
Unless you be possess'd with devilish spirits,
Married Richard Earl of Cambridge, who was son
This small inheritance my father left me
York doth present himself unto your highness.
God knows, of pure devotion, being call'd
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser,
and here, Tom, take all the money that I have. O
You cannot but forbear to murder me:
Ah, barbarous villains! hath this lovely face
son-in-law's house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off
Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays,
And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
That for my surety will refuse the boys!
Yet now farewell, and farewell life with thee!
You go about to torture me in vain.
take my death, I never meant him any ill, nor the
Oppose himself against a troop of kerns,
Early and late, debating to and fro
And that I'll write upon thy burgonet,
How now, fellow! would'st anything with me?
More like a soldier than a man o' the church,
Here I am, thou particular fellow.
down the Tower too. Come, let's away.
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words,
My lord, I long to hear it at full.
Had been the regent there instead of me,
Exit
Say 'Who's a traitor? Gloucester he is none.'
So long as I am loyal, true and crimeless.
That time best fits the work we have in hand.
For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.
Exeunt all but the First Gentleman
This hand was made to handle naught but gold.
hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it an eunuch:
By water shall he die, and take his end.
What, wilt thou on thy death-bed play the ruffian,
Enter SIR HUMPHREY and WILLIAM STAFFORD, with drum and soldiers
What! art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?
Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.
Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers,
This weighty business will not brook delay:
That he should come about your royal person
Aside to CARDINAL
thought any such matter: God is my witness, I am
And smooth my way upon their headless necks,
Resign it then and leave thine insolence.
And the protector's wife, beloved of him?
And Henry, though he be infortunate,
Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind,
How would it fare with your departed souls?
Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
But cloaks and gowns, before this day, a many.
apparel them all in one livery, that they may agree
Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell,
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
Now, by the ground that I am banish'd from,
No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.
From thee to die were torture more than death:
Take this fellow in, and send for
And poise the cause in justice' equal scales,
Unto the main! O father, Maine is lost,
But that in all my life, when I was a youth.
Ten is the hour that was appointed me
Which now they hold by force and not by right,
Is his to use, so Somerset may die.
And thou that art his mate, make boot of this,
Live in your country here in banishment,
I take it kindly, and yet be well assured
So, there goes our protector in a rage.
My gracious lord, return to Killingworth,
Let him have all the rigor of the law.
What are you made of? you'll nor fight nor fly:
And left behind him Richard, his only son,
Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract,
Exit
That shall I do, my liege. Stay, Salisbury,
Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March:
Drum. Enter CADE, DICK the Butcher, SMITH the Weaver, and a Sawyer, with infinite numbers
And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey's deeds,
out of order. Come, march forward.
But I in danger for the breach of law.
Pool! Sir Pool! lord!
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Medice, teipsum--
Shall Henry's conquest, Bedford's vigilance,
Ungentle queen, to call him gentle Suffolk!
And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.
Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
As e'er thy father Henry made it mine,
Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers,
Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!
Away, for your relief! and we will live
They will by violence tear him from your palace
Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life,
If it be fond, call it a woman's fear,
Enter EDWARD and RICHARD
Away with him! and do as I command ye.
And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland,
Exeunt guard with MARGARET JOURDAIN, SOUTHWELL,  and c
Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk,
For Suffolk, he that can do all in all
Join we together, for the public good,
That drag the tragic melancholy night,
Was by a beggar-woman stolen away,
Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush
Hath he conversed with the enemy,
The king and all the peers are here at hand.
Did instigate the bedlam brain-sick duchess
He be approved in practise culpable.
And not a thought but thinks on dignity.
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.
Not resolute, except so much were done,
And thy ambition, Gloucester.
Lord cardinal, I will follow Eleanor,
If they were known, as the suspect is great,
It is impossible that I should die
A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head.
Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court,
Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood,
Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.
Say as you think, and speak it from your souls,
Cease, gentle queen, these execrations,
I never robb'd the soldiers of their pay,
To watch the coming of my punish'd duchess:
that you should leave me at the White Hart in
Madam, 'tis true, and were't not madness, then,
And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Sorrow and grief have vanquish'd all my powers,
So, if the issue of the elder son
He is a traitor, let him to the Tower,
As for the Duke of York, this late complaint
That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent,
Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high.
Come back, fool, this is the Duke of Suffolk, and
That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
His son am I, deny it, if you can.
Say you consent and censure well the deed,
Seditious to his grace and to the state.
Knit earth and heaven together!
They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou
Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will!
Therefore come you with us and let him go.
And where this breach now in our fortunes made
ladyship behold and hear our exorcisms?
O, torture me no more! I will confess.
Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again:
Stand by, my masters: bring him near the king,
My Lord of Winchester, I know your mind,
A noise within
Is crept into the palace of our king.
My lord protector's hawks do tower so well,
What, madam, are you there? the king and commonweal
We'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming.
For suddenly a grievous sickness took him,
Although the duke was enemy to him,
Cannot do more in England than the Nevils:
My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered:
That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.
I cannot justify whom the law condemns.
Had I but said, I would have kept my word,
For with his soul fled all my worldly solace,
We thank you all for the great favour done,
To wash away my woful monuments.
I saw not better sport these seven years' day:
Of that great shadow I did represent,
To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.
Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare,
Why dost thou quiver, man?
Particularities and petty sounds
Exit
As procurator to your excellence,
Come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.
Was never subject long'd to be a king
SCENE IX. Kenilworth Castle.
Or hath mine uncle Beaufort and myself,
Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!
And not be cheque'd.
Disdaining duty that to us belongs.
Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distress'd.
numbers for the matter,
Enter some, bringing forward the Clerk of Chatham
My heart is turn'd to stone: and while 'tis mine,
Exeunt WARWICK and SALISBURY
Since thou wert king--as who is king but thou?--
Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?
Your lady is forthcoming yet at London.
That mounts no higher than a bird can soar.
o'er, should undo a man? Some say the bee stings:
with you: I'll see if his head will stand steadier
That head of thine doth not become a crown,
For swallowing the treasure of the realm:
Before his legs be firm to bear his body.
If York have ill demean'd himself in France,
My thoughts, that labour to persuade my soul
But that 'tis shown ignobly and in treason.
Exeunt CARDINAL, SOMERSET, and others
Or as the snake roll'd in a flowering bank,
Under the title of John Mortimer.
As hating thee, are rising up in arms:
you, for I think I have taken my last draught in
Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me,
Despite the bear-ward that protects the bear.
[Aside]  He need not fear the sword, for his coat is of proof.
And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling:
Being opposites of such repairing nature.
Sirrah, or you must fight, or else be hang'd.
His lady banish'd, and a limb lopp'd off.
'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,
Until a power be raised to put them down.
Why should he, then, protect our sovereign,
and knock down! throw them into Thames!
Warwick, my son, the comfort of my age,
Thou hast hit it, for there's no better sign of a
Think therefore on revenge and cease to weep.
But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge,
Enter Messenger
Shall be to me even as the dew to fire,
As crooked in thy manners as thy shape!
Or, if he were not privy to those faults,
Of Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippe,
Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.
[Reads]  'Item, It is further agreed between them,
Father, the duke hath told the truth:
They sale of offices and towns in France,
What, hast thou been long blind and now restored?
Would curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan,
And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds:
Did never traitor in the land commit.
If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.
My lord,
O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemn'd
To wring the widow from her custom'd right,
And if words will not, then our weapons shall.
They are all in order and march toward us.
before us, instead of maces, will we ride through
Warwick may live to be the best of all.
It is to you, good people, that I speak,
Thy lips that kiss'd the queen shall sweep the ground,
But now it is impossible we should:
all!
And after summer evermore succeeds
Witness the fortune he hath had in France.
Who since I heard to be discomfited.
Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it?
Enter a Beadle with whips
And princes' courts be fill'd with my reproach.
Take away his weapon. Fellow, thank God, and the
The clerk of Chatham: he can write and read and
What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face?
If he be old enough, what needs your grace
Contemptuous base-born callet as she is,
Peter, forsooth.
deal with my master, he hath learnt me so much fence already.
To be your regent in the realm of France.
Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?
Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose,
For every word you speak in his behalf
Nay, he can make obligations, and write court-hand.
Exeunt
hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and
To call them both a pair of crafty knaves.
To reconcile you all unto the king.
The business asketh silent secrecy.
Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows?
Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold.
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
Still revelling like lords till all be gone,
Clip dead men's graves and from their misty jaws
And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe,
Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.
Jesu bless him!
I come to talk of commonwealth affairs.
Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.
Sirrah, what's thy name?
SCENE I. The Abbey at Bury St. Edmund's.
This news, I think, hath turn'd your weapon's edge,
Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a
Enter GLOUCESTER
Alarums to the battle. Enter WARWICK
Even so suspicious is this tragedy.
And told me that by water I should die:
'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence,
Thrice-noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke.
Enter YORK and BUCKINGHAM with their Guard and break in
True, and yet it is said, labour in thy vocation,
Do seek subversion of thy harmless life?
I tender so the safety of my liege.
burying-place to all that do dwell in this house,
Alexander Iden, that's my name,
his master with a pursuivant presently: we'll hear
Marry, presently.
May pass into the presence of a king,
For he hath witness of his servant's malice:
They may astonish these fell-lurking curs:
I claimed the crown, had issue, Philippe, a daughter,
And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!
O, let me stay, befall what may befall!
Second 'Prentice	Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master: fight
And call these foul offenders to their answers
prostrate and grovel on the earth, John Southwell,
Or with their blood stain this discolour'd shore.
and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse' heels
Enter another Messenger
speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good
First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride,
Kneels
Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?
Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.
And lofty proud encroaching tyranny,
And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!
And charge that no man should disturb your rest
Sent from a sort of tinkers to the king.
[Aside]  Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great:
Wither goes Vaux so fast? what news, I prithee?
pound, the last subsidy.
The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
[Aside]  A' must needs, for beggary is valiant.
Delivered up again with peaceful words?
Follow the knave, and take this drab away.
Than bring a burthen of dishonour home
But see, his face is black and full of blood,
That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm,
Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke.
No sooner was I crept out of my cradle
Exit
It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee
Look to it, lords! let not his smoothing words
We thank you all.
That all the court admired him for submission:
I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dress
Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
[Reading]  'To my Lord Protector!' Are your
Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
But, noble as he is, look where he comes.
And, like a gallant in the brow of youth,
Enter HORNER, the Armourer, and his man PETER, guarded
Take heed, my lord, the welfare of us all
thee with a downright blow!
And try your hap against the Irishmen?
False king! why hast thou broken faith with me,
Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt,
SCENE II. Blackheath.
Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.
Enter CLIFFORD and YOUNG CLIFFORD
Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court,
Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!
Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.
Even as I have of fertile England's soil.
Have made thee fear'd and honour'd of the people:
First note that he is near you in descent,
So God help Warwick, as he loves the land,
Exeunt
I will reward you for this venturous deed.
So mighty are his vowed enemies.
thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord! now
Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings,
His wife, an't like your worship.
Ye shall have a hempen caudle, then, and the help of hatchet.
My Lord of York, try what your fortune is.
Should be to be protected like a child.
ACT V
But I was made a king, at nine months old.
Give me some drink, and bid the apothecary
I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him,
But, soft! I think she comes, and I'll prepare
With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain
Comb down his hair, look, look! it stands upright,
What say you of Kent?
bill, and many a time, when I have been dry and
Let him shun castles,
Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?
and a traitor.
A spirit raised from depth of under-ground,
Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.
If ever lady wrong'd her lord so much,
Than Bargulus the strong Illyrian pirate.
But God in mercy so deal with my soul,
Because his purpose is not executed.
Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,
No, let him die, in that he is a fox,
Received deep scars in France and Normandy?
Next, if I be appointed for the place,
Unto the daughter of a worthless king,
For my part, noble lords, I care not which,
And let these have a day appointed them
And dead men's cries do fill the empty air,
And York and impious Beaufort, that false priest,
The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.
Exit
Defacing monuments of conquer'd France,
If so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face,
your hearts.
Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought to-day,
The elder of them, being put to nurse,
The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line
And did my brother Bedford toil his wits,
And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles?
What is my ransom, master? let me know.
The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags!
This devil here shall be my substitute,
Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign,
And in thy sight to die, what were it else
Now show yourselves men, 'tis for liberty.
How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself?
We shall to London get, where you are loved
daughter unto Reignier King of Naples, Sicilia and
With ignominious words, though clerkly couch'd,
--Command silence.
To match with her that brings no vantages.
Strange tortures for offenders never heard of,
honest man: and touching the Duke of York, I will
While his own lands are bargain'd for and sold.
As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,
And banished I am, if but from thee.
Madam, myself have limed a bush for her,
Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,
I stood upon the hatches in the storm,
they come to Berwick, from whence they came.
My lord protector, so it please your grace,
And shame thine honourable age with blood?
Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts.
Hale him away, and let him talk no more.
In this close walk to satisfy myself,
I can no more: live thou to joy thy life,
True, madam, none at all: what call you this?
Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste!
Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee.'
Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts,
Well, lords, we have not got that which we have:
sound retreat or parley, when I command them kill?
Exeunt all but QUEEN MARGARET, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, and YORK, SOMERSET remains apart
Prove them, and I lie open to the law:
Alarum. Fight at sea. Ordnance goes off. Enter a  Captain, a Master, a Master's-mate, WALTER WHITMORE, and others, with them SUFFOLK, and others, prisoners
That is too much presumption on thy part:
And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.
Oft have I seen a hot o'erweening cur
Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting
We will make fast within a hallow'd verge.
Farewell, my lord: trust not the Kentish rebels.
His words were these: that Richard, Duke of York,
And Henry put apart, the next for me.
What, art thou lame?
In pain of your dislike or pain of death,
Remember it and let it make thee crest-fall'n,
And threw it towards thy land: the sea received it,
Exit, guarded
Which fear if better reasons can supplant,
I would, false murderous coward, on thy knee
I know no pain they can inflict upon him
Join with the traitor, and they jointly swear
I know not.
as a doornail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.
Hath slain their governors, surprised our forts,
It shall be stony. York not our old men spares,
quart pot to drink in, and now the word 'sallet'
Is this the fashion in the court of England?
This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,
But fear not thou, until thy foot be snared,
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief,
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives,
Devise strange deaths for small offences done?
Have been as bondmen to thy sovereignty.
And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester scarce himself,
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here
A plum-tree, master.
And thou a prince, protector of this land,
I'll see it truly done, my Lord of York.
Than all the princes in the land beside:
And did he not, in his protectorship,
And bid me be advised how I tread.
This peroration with such circumstance?
Are these thy bears? we'll bait thy bears to death.
Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet,
And had I twenty times so many foes,
Come with thy two-hand sword.
The rebels have assay'd to win the Tower.
Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done,
ACT IV
The splitting rocks cower'd in the sinking sands
And calls your grace usurper openly
From thence unto the place of execution:
ink-horn about his neck.
We took him setting of boys' copies.
No malice, sir, no more than well becomes
But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another,
Ay, but I hope your highness shall have his.
Assail them with the army of the king.
paper-mill. It will be proved to thy face that thou
Even of the bonny beast he loved so well.
Though standing naked on a mountain top,
What know I how the world may deem of me?
And, to speak truth, thou deservest no less. This
I beseech your majesty, give me leave to go,
Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war,
Sharp Buckingham unburthens with his tongue
'Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing the
Small things make base men proud: this villain here,
Hast thou not kiss'd thy hand and held my stirrup?
Did he so often lodge in open field,
Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,
Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can,
So was his will in his old feeble body.
Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook,
Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together,
And reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd,
To say if that the bastard boys of York
Is straightway calm'd and boarded with a pirate:
which is as much to say as, let the magistrates be
Became a bricklayer when he came to age:
La fin couronne les oeuvres.
Now, my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
To be the post, in hope of his reward.
Such aid as I can spare you shall command,
Than any thou canst conjure up to-day,
Enter CADE and the rest, and strikes his staff on London-stone
The fearful French, whom you late vanquished,
went to span-counter for French crowns, I am content
And, force perforce, I'll make him yield the crown,
An't please your grace, here my commission stays,
Pernicious protector, dangerous peer,
Great men oft die by vile bezonians:
But 'tis my presence that doth trouble ye.
Away with them to prison, and the day of combat
Thump.
Nay, he nods at us, as who should say, I'll be even
That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murder'd
With shining chequer'd slough, doth sting a child
Lord Buckingham, methinks, you watch'd her well:
And I accept the combat willingly.
Which he had thought to have murder'd wrongfully.
Justice with favour have I always done,
But that he was bound by a solemn oath?
By the mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard:
He were created knight for his good service.
Of one or both of us the time is come.
Here are the articles of contracted peace
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
Rises
Sound a parley
Upon my life, began her devilish practises:
Only convey me where thou art commanded.
O, let the vile world end,
After the Beadle hath hit him once, he leaps over the stool and runs away, and they follow and cry, 'A miracle!'
Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold:
I would the college of the cardinals
'Tis like the commons, rude unpolish'd hinds,
It is my office, and, madam, pardon me.
A world of earthly blessings to my soul,
And turn the force of them upon thyself.
Have hired me to undermine the duchess
Let him shun castles,
Hume must make merry with the duchess' gold,
Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Are ye advised? the
Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey:
Hath won the greatest favour of the commons,
So help me God, as I have watch'd the night,
Pardon me, gracious lord,
Say, if thou darest, proud Lord of Warwick-shire,
'A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.'
As willingly do I the same resign
What means this noise?
Is't not enough to break into my garden,
We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
Lands, goods, horse, armour, any thing I have,
But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,
Who can accuse me? wherein am I guilty?
Under the wings of our protector's grace,
O Thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts,
Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.
How now! why look'st thou pale? why tremblest thou?
Ay, indeed, was he.
doublet quickly.
Ten, my lord.
They call false caterpillars, and intend their death.
By this I shall perceive the commons' mind,
my case. The spite of man prevaileth against me. O
Sword, hold thy temper, heart, be wrathful still:
Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers.
And are the cities, that I got with wounds,
For Humphrey being dead, as he shall be,
Who, being suffer'd with the bear's fell paw,
Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh
And equity exiled your highness' land.
Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load?
I think I should have told your grace's tale.
Enter YORK, and his army of Irish, with drum and colours
Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.
[Aside to CARDINAL]  Cardinal, I am with you.
I go. Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us?
With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness:
To play my part in Fortune's pageant.
death affright?
We twain will go into his highness' tent.
sallet, my brainpan had been cleft with a brown
Soldiers, I thank you all, disperse yourselves,
Your grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York,
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
supplications to his lordship? Let me see them:
By day, by night, waking and in my dreams,
By shameful murder of a guiltless king
Fed from my trencher, kneel'd down at the board.
Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen
As well we may, if not through your neglect,
Image of pride, why should I hold my peace?
And spirits walk and ghosts break up their graves,
Lord cardinal, he is your prisoner.
I fear neither sword nor fire.
Bid Salisbury and Warwick come to me.
Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast:
Far be it we should honour such as these
And kept asunder. You, madam, shall with us.
No, indeed, master.
I'll call him presently, my noble lord.
Exit VAUX
Flourish of trumpets: then hautboys. Enter KING  HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and  CARDINAL, on the one side, QUEEN MARGARET, SUFFOLK, YORK, SOMERSET, and BUCKINGHAM, on the other
And he a prince and ruler of the land:
As by your grace shall be propounded him.
But mine is made the prologue to their play,
And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart
Exit
Lionel Duke of Clarence: next to whom
To Bedlam with him! is the man grown mad?
But here's a vengeful sword, rusted with ease,
I'll have thy head for this thy traitor's speech.
since. How now! who's there?
Be that thou hopest to be, or what thou art
King did I call thee? no, thou art not king,
Were't not all one, an empty eagle were set
It cannot be but he was murder'd here,
Yet he most Christian-like laments his death:
Noise within. Enter WARWICK, SALISBURY, and many Commons
He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield,
Nor his?
Not half so bad as thine to England's king,
Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured
Thou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask,
Here a' comes, methinks, and the queen with him.
Will he conduct you through the heart of France,
With thy brave bearing should I be in love,
has a familiar under his tongue, he speaks not o'
A sorry breakfast for my lord protector.
To quell the rebels and their complices.
And Sir John Stanley is appointed now
Send succors, lords, and stop the rage betime,
For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.
I know thee not, why, then, should I betray thee?
Have practised dangerously against your state,
But meet him now, and, be it in the morn,
Let never day nor night unhallow'd pass,
Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God and
[Aside]  Mass, 'twill be sore law, then, for he was
Never, before this day, in all his life.
Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised?
proper cost and charges, without having any dowry.'
Stay, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester: ere thou go,
Lord cardinal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss,
Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place,
Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?
Exeunt
I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.
If Salisbury be lost.
And beauty that the tyrant oft reclaims
you, base peasants, do ye believe him? will you
As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove:
At Berwick in the north, an't like your grace.
Is this the government of Britain's isle,
To change two dukedoms for a duke's fair daughter.
And change misdoubt to resolution:
Ay, uncle, we will keep it, if we can,
As surely as my soul intends to live
fire, being burnt i' the hand for stealing of sheep.
As next the king he was successive heir,
And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk,
your town, and things called whips?
Once by the king, and three times thrice by thee.
We thank you, lords. But I am not your king
The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed,
God and King Henry govern England's realm.
I had in charge at my depart for France,
Why, our authority is his consent,
whipped three market-days together.
thirtieth of May next ensuing. Item, that the duchy
for they loved well when they were alive. Now part
To see her coronation be perform'd.
Why, that's well said. Go, get you to my house,
And after all this fearful homage done,
And so will I and write home for it straight.
God save your majesty!
Should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you?
And when the dusky sky began to rob
And, Nevil, this I do assure myself:
And, for a minister of my intent,
To-morrow toward London back again,
By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means.
Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man's
That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
O thou eternal Mover of the heavens.
To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot,
If sympathy of love unite our thoughts.
'Tis not my speeches that you do mislike,
Even so myself bewails good Gloucester's case
not my lord protector.
The citizens fly and forsake their houses:
Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us,
Come, Margaret, God, our hope, will succor us.
Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.
In winter's cold and summer's parching heat,
I humbly thank your royal majesty.
At Buckingham and all the crew of them,
Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?
sold many laces.
You use her well: the world may laugh again,
For shame! in duty bend thy knee to me
Last time, I danced attendance on his will
Crowned in Paris in despite of foes?
That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove
Unless by robbing of your friends and us.
For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,
Alarum. They fight, and PETER strikes him down
Unto a dunghill which shall be thy grave,
Madam, the king is old enough himself
We'll follow Cade, we'll follow Cade!
Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?
Thou ran'st a tilt in honour of my love
Jove sometimes went disguised, and why not I?
Then let him be denay'd the regentship.
But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done:
And then it lived in sweet Elysium.
If they can brook I bow a knee to man.
Welcome is banishment, welcome were my death.
Have done, for more I hardly can endure.
The duchess, by his subornation,
Come, let us in, and with all speed provide
Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, GLOUCESTER, CARDINAL, and SUFFOLK, with Falconers halloing
For they are thrifty honest men, and such
Stay, Whitmore, for thy prisoner is a prince,
Didst ever hear a man so penitent?
No, no, my sovereign, Gloucester is a man
Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
breath stinks with eating toasted cheese.
spoil of the city until night: for with these borne
Now is it manhood, wisdom and defence,
Because I wish'd this world's eternity.
Protector be, and God shall be my hope,
And for myself, foe as he was to me,
And placed a quire of such enticing birds,
For none abides with me: my joy is death,
Outcast of Naples, England's bloody scourge!
Dies
The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal,
And on the pieces of the broken wand
But to the rest.
That my master was? no, forsooth: my master said
father had never a house but the cage.
Sorrow would solace and mine age would ease.
Holden at Bury the first of this next month.
Jack Cade hath gotten London bridge:
Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud,
He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.
Ay me! what is this world! what news are these!
Fie on ambition! fie on myself, that have a sword,
Sits in grim majesty, to fright the world.
You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands.
My tear-stain'd eyes to see her miseries.
Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast,
I pray, my lord, pardon me, I took ye for my lord
Methinks the realms of England, France and Ireland
With full as many signs of deadly hate,
While these do labour for their own preferment,
Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile
So am I given in charge, may't please your grace.
I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I pray
I'll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.
thousand years I could stay no longer. Wherefore,
he shall reign, but I'll be protector over him.
Ah, Nell, forbear! thou aimest all awry,
Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.
Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?
Eleanor, the law, thou see'st, hath judged thee:
With whose envenomed and fatal sting,
What shall King Henry be a pupil still
O, brave!
Seal up your lips, and give no words but mum:
But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.
For grief that they are past recovery:
Sleeping or waking, 'tis no matter how,
Clifford of Cumberland, 'tis Warwick calls:
But boldly stand and front him to his face.
Or of devotion, to this holy shrine?
Madam, be still, with reverence may I say,
for credit of the 'prentices.
Till I be crown'd and that my sword be stain'd
No, no, and therefore we'll have his head.
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast,
Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name? or
Could I come near your beauty with my nails,
Most true, forsooth, and many time and oft
busy below, and so, I pray you, go, in God's name,
Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud
They please us well. Lord marquess, kneel down:
The king will labour still to save his life,
Until his army be dismiss'd from him.
'What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?'
As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe
Mark'd for the gallows, lay your weapons down,
Master, this prisoner freely give I thee,
the burly-boned clown in chines of beef ere thou
Who kept him in captivity till he died.
That is to see how deep my grave is made,
And if thou dost not hide thee from the bear,
That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart
O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint,
broached, and beard thee too. Look on me well: I
Yet, to recover them, would lose my life.
hast caused printing to be used, and, contrary to
And fought so long, till that his thighs with darts
Why, 'tis well known that, whiles I was
Exit with the body
And may that thought, when I imagine ill
As place Duke Humphrey for the king's protector?
As firmly as I hope for fertile England.
And other of your highness' privy-council,
To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
Till Suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter.
Mail'd up in shame, with papers on my back,
this hot weather. And I think this word 'sallet'
I do arrest thee of high treason here.
Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad,
Ay, my good lord, he's dead.
Alarum. Retreat. Enter YORK, RICHARD, WARWICK, and Soldiers, with drum and colours
For your behoof,--
Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?
Nay, do not fright us with an angry look,
I tell thee, Pole, when in the city Tours
Be hang'd up for example at their doors:
Fatal this marriage, cancelling your fame,
Away from me, and let me hear no more!
I go.
See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with the queen:
And such high vaunts of his nobility,
Why droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn,
And if my death might make this island happy,
Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.
Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum
And you that love the commons, follow me.
Shall, after three days' open penance done,
Exeunt GLOUCESTER and Servingmen
Were almost like a sharp-quill'd porpentine,
The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt,
Be my last breathing in this mortal world!
A Clifford! a Clifford! we'll follow the king and Clifford.
Enter the Mayor of Saint Alban's and his  brethren, bearing SIMPCOX, between two in a chair, SIMPCOX's Wife following
Sweet is the country, because full of riches,
And when he please to make commotion,
Sound Trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and SOMERSET, on the terrace
They say, in care of your most royal person,
Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced,
I fear me you but warm the starved snake,
What dream'd my lord? tell me, and I'll requite it
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms traitor.
And sees fast by a butcher with an axe,
And gird thee with the sword. Cousin of York,
thrust in the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole
This staff of honour raught, there let it stand
Where as the king and queen do mean to hawk.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,
Yet did I purpose as they do entreat,
And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
By her he had two children at one birth.
All these could not procure me any scathe,
As that proud dame, the lord protector's wife.
Goodman, my lord cardinal's man, for keeping my
There's reason he should be displeased at it.
And manacle the bear-ward in their chains,
Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more
The witch in Smithfield shall be burn'd to ashes,
And that's not suddenly to be perform'd,
Look, on the sheets his hair you see, is sticking,
Her words y-clad with wisdom's majesty,
To conquer France, his true inheritance?
Please it your majesty, this is the man
Of gallowglasses and stout kerns
As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess,
The lives of those which we have lost in fight
east side of the grove?
It grieves my soul to leave thee unassail'd.
And followed with a rabble that rejoice
With that dread King that took our state upon him
And such a piece of service will you do,
Deliver'd strongly through my fixed teeth,
Murder'd sweet Tully, Brutus' bastard hand
And do not stand on quillets how to slay him:
Marry, the Lord protect him, for he's a good man!
and more than that, he can speak French, and
To make the fox surveyor of the fold?
Sword, I will hollow thee for this thy deed,
For I am rightful heir unto the crown.
Continue still in this so good a mind,
And never ask'd for restitution.
Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!
Used to command, untaught to plead for favour.
O peers of England, shameful is this league!
We here create thee the first duke of Suffolk,
To signify unto his majesty
Therefore, when merchant-like I sell revenge,
will come this way by and by, and then we may deliver
These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding,
Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command,
As frowning at the favours of the world?
How irksome is this music to my heart!
happiness!
Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
And left thee to the mercy of the law.
Whom we have apprehended in the fact,
See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.
More can I bear than you dare execute.
We are alone, here's none but thee and I.
And no great friend, I fear me, to the king.
Tell me, good fellow, camest thou here by chance,
And work in their shirt too, as myself, for example,
O gross and miserable ignorance!
behavedst thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own
Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.
Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she came,
My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears.
Then, York, be still awhile, till time do serve:
Persuaded him from any further act:
cloak, when honester men than thou go in their hose
Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth,
I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.
to drink small beer: all the realm shall be in
And in his simple show he harbours treason.
'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend,
I see them! I see them! there's Best's son, the
And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
But, my lord cardinal, and you, my Lord of Suffolk,
To guard the chicken from a hungry kite,
And therefore I will take the Nevils' parts
My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days
Horner, for saying that the Duke of York was rightful
Than this kind kiss. O Lord, that lends me life,
Have you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham,
Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground!
What woman is this?
Enter SOMERSET
I must offend before I be attainted,
What were it but to make my sorrow greater?
And bears his thoughts above his falcon's pitch.
Here, Hume, take this reward, make merry, man,
Enter MARGARET JOURDAIN, HUME, SOUTHWELL, and BOLINGBROKE
Give place: by heaven, thou shalt rule no more
No, dark shall be my light and night my day,
[Aside]  He was an honest man, and a good
To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.
Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,
And all the wealthy kingdoms of the west,
Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright:
Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.
The Castle in Saint Alban's, Somerset
like brothers and worship me their lord.
This get I by his death: ay me, unhappy!
and yet am ready to famish! These five days have I
And humbly now upon my bended knee,
slaughter-house: therefore thus will I reward thee,
Nothing but this, 'tis 'bona terra, mala gens.'
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
That if your highness should intend to sleep
He doth revive again: madam, be patient.
And on my head did set the diadem.
At Beaufort's pride, at Somerset's ambition,
It is great sin to swear unto a sin,
Let not her penance exceed the king's commission.
Exit GLOUCESTER. QUEEN MARGARET drops her fan
Than stand uncover'd to the vulgar groom.
You were best to go to bed and dream again,
To keep thee from the tempest of the field.
Was broke in twain, by whom I have forgot,
This doom, my lord, if I may judge:
Alas, sir, I am but a poor petitioner of our whole township.
For where thou art, there is the world itself,
if you mean to save yourself from whipping, leap me
halfpenny loaves sold for a penny: the three-hooped
When such strings jar, what hope of harmony?
And therefore am I bold and resolute.
Suffolk's imperial tongue is stern and rough,
What though the common people favour him,
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed:
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey,
How now! what news? why comest thou in such haste?
Away, my lord, away!
cast accompt.
Prayers and tears have moved me, gifts could never.
A hundred times and oftener, in my sleep,
And, being protector, stayed the soldiers' pay,
the king shall know your mind.
therefore deny it not.
Meet I an infant of the house of York,
Long live our sovereign Richard, England's king!
Rises
O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,
mightest as well have known all our names as thus to
The treasury of everlasting joy.
The king is now in progress towards Saint Alban's,
I'll send them all as willing as I live:
My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
The commonwealth hath daily run to wreck,
Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me:
The very train of her worst wearing gown
Enter a Messenger
My shame will not be shifted with my sheet:
Fie! charity, for shame! speak not in spite,
Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be,
These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased!
Exeunt severally
Suffolk, arise. Welcome, Queen Margaret:
They say, in him they fear your highness' death,
And, vanquish'd as I am, I yield to thee,
So might your grace's person be in danger.
For whilst I think I am thy married wife
You, madam, for you are more nobly born,
the king, his crown and dignity, thou hast built a
What did I then, but cursed the gentle gusts
tanner of Wingham,--
Madam, I am protector of the realm,
With walking once about the quadrangle,
Your grace's title shall be multiplied.
Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
And give her as a prey to law and shame,
To your most gracious hands, that are the substance
Myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny,
For thou hast given me in this beauteous face
The cause why I have brought this army hither
Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy.
Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night,
And call'd them blind and dusky spectacles,
If from this presence thou darest go with me.
Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves.
Enter BUCKINGHAM
My lord, break we off, we know your mind at full.
And he of these that can do most of all
Nephew, what means this passionate discourse,
To keep, until your further time of trial.
If not in heaven, you'll surely sup in hell.
Enter a Herald
Were't not a shame, that whilst you live at jar,
Exeunt
'Aio te, AEacida, Romanos vincere posse.'
Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock,
Roger had issue, Edmund, Anne and Eleanor.
But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
And will that thou henceforth attend on us.
crowns of the king carrying my head to him: but
More like an empress than Duke Humphrey's wife:
Which mates him first that first intends deceit.
'Tis known to you he is mine enemy,
The head of Cade! Great God, how just art Thou!
Would choose him pope, and carry him to Rome,
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
How now! why start'st thou? what, doth
Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding:
She bears a duke's revenues on her back,
Will make but little for his benefit.
O monstrous coward! what, to come behind folks?
My wife descended of the Lacies,--
What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,
Undoing all, as all had never been!
good wine in thy master's way.
And now the house of York, thrust from the crown
Whom have I injured, that ye seek my death?
Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence,
dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these
I will repeal thee, or, be well assured,
I will, my lord, and doubt not so to deal
For God forbid so many simple souls
For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe,
Exit one with the Clerk
The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me,
Enter SCALES upon the Tower, walking. Then enter two or three Citizens below
thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as dead
Are lank and lean with thy extortions.
Sweet aunt, be quiet, 'twas against her will.
Her sight did ravish, but her grace in speech,
And temper clay with blood of Englishmen:
Exeunt
Exit an Attendant
As I in justice and true right express it.
The duke is virtuous, mild and too well given
[Aside]  She was, indeed, a pedler's daughter, and
Patience, good lady, wizards know their times:
Be playfellows to keep you company!
I see no reason why a king of years
Oppose thy steadfast-gazing eyes to mine,
Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
Enter BEVIS, with Lord SAY
He hath confessed: away with him! he's a villain
Enter GEORGE BEVIS and JOHN HOLLAND
As others would ambitiously receive it.
This way for me.
Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.
My lord protector, 'tis his highness' pleasure
selling the dukedom of Maine.
As stout and proud as he were lord of all,
Convey him hence and on our longboat's side
He shall have the skin of our enemies, to make
I do arrest you in his highness' name,
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it
Do you as I do in these dangerous days:
The greatest man in England but the king.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  And so, my lord protector,
And had I not been cited so by them,
Mischance unto my state by Suffolk's means:
Why, then, dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.
Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.
her maidenhead ere they have it: men shall hold of
A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue!
What plain proceeding is more plain than this?
Now let the general trumpet blow his blast,
This way fall I to death.
She vaunted 'mongst her minions t'other day,
By means whereof his highness hath lost France.
Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban:
The second, William of Hatfield, and the third,
How fares my lord? Help, lords! the king is dead.
Ring, bells, aloud, burn, bonfires, clear and bright,
And he but naked, though lock'd up in steel
In your protectorship you did devise
Saint Alban.
others to the inns of court, down with them all.
And now may seem as wise as virtuous,
Come hither, England's hope.
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
The bloody parliament shall this be call'd,
Stand we in good array, for they no doubt
If secret powers
I here renounce him and return to Henry.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
I think his understanding is bereft.
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak,
Making another head to fight again.
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?
O, yes, it doth, a thousand-fold it doth.
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch!
Such is the lightness of you common men.
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
They fight. WARWICK comes, CLIFFORD flies
Stabbing him
And, if though canst for blushing, view this face,
Here at the palace I will rest awhile.
Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
Exeunt all but WARWICK
He swore consent to your succession,
But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.
My waned state for Henry's regal crown.
A woman's general, what should we fear?
And for this once my will shall stand for law.
And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood?
Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.
The lamb will never cease to follow him.
Who 'scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey,
I'll do thee service for so good a gift.
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows.
I am your butt, and I abide your shot.
Why, Via! to London will we march amain,
Sound drums and trumpets! farewell sour annoy!
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance:
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.
Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this:
The lustful Edward's title buried--
Exeunt
And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.
Your horse stands ready at the park-corner.
Enter the Mayor and two Aldermen, below
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
her wax must melt.
The thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse:
So true men yield, with robbers so o'ermatch'd.
And this the regal seat: possess it, York,
In vain thou speak'st, poor boy, my father's blood
That we are those which chased you from the field
Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
My brother was too careless of his charge.
So we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle,
But, in the midst of this bright-shining day,
Exeunt
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour,
Ah, know you not the city favours them,
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.
Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother,
To be no better than a homely swain,
Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his drum.
Is as a fury to torment my soul,
Would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all,
The queen hath best success when you are absent.
Enter CLARENCE, with drum and colours
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
As doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust,
Injurious Margaret!
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
Away, I say, I charge ye, bear her hence.
In this self-place where now we mean to stand.
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean,
Where peremptory Warwick now remains:
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!
Enter, on the walls, the Mayor of York, and his Brethren
Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest
Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade
With this, we charged again: but, out, alas!
Let me entreat, for I command no more,
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe.
What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
What counsel give you? whither shall we fly?
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen,
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak:
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.
Poor queen! how love to me and to her son
Why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
Farewell, sweet lords: let's meet at Coventry.
O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
Whither the queen intends. Forward, away!
And am I then a man to be beloved?
And she shall be my love, or else my queen.--
'Tis virtue that doth make them most admired,
'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud,
O, pity, God, this miserable age!
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here,
Lords, give us leave: I'll try this widow's wit.
Dies
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.
Shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Let AEsop fable in a winter's night,
And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well,
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
The duty that I owe unto your majesty
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.
Speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
And, often but attended with weak guard,
And from that torment I will free myself,
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
The loss of those three lords torments my heart:
Where fame, late entering at his heedful ears,
So many hours must I tend my flock,
You cavil, widow: I did mean, my queen.
The king by this is set him down to sleep.
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Enter KING HENRY VI, disguised, with a prayerbook
Upon my target three fair-shining suns.
SCENE I. Coventry.
For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.
This is the hand that stabb'd thy father York,
If this right hand would buy two hour's life,
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  I think he means to beg a
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
To whom God will, there be the victory!
Have we mow'd down, in tops of all their pride!
But whether 'twas the coldness of the king,
I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
And ship from thence to Flanders.
Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it,
Why should she live, to fill the world with words?
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
Hark, hark, my lord! what shouts are these?
Yield not thy neck
Alarums: excursions. Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, and EXETER
I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary,
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Exeunt some with KING HENRY VI
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
How could he stay till Warwick made return?
Why, then I will do what your grace commands.
The common people swarm like summer flies,
Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
Yet lives our pilot still. Is't meet that he
The saddest spectacle that e'er I view'd.
Clarence, beware, thou keep'st me from the light:
Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND, CLIFFORD, and WESTMORELAND
So long as Edward is thy constant friend,
Stabs him
If he arise, be mock'd and wonder'd at.
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?
Base, fearful and despairing Henry!
By this alliance to make void my suit:
Our slaughter'd friends the tackles, what of these?
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Come, fellow-soldier, make thou proclamation.
Why, that's my fortune too, therefore I'll stay.
And then, to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Ay, good leave have you, for
Hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas,
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?
[Aside]  I know not what to say, my title's weak.--
And would you not do much to do them good?
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm,
Unsavoury news! but how made he escape?
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
So cowards fight when they can fly no further,
And so obsequious will thy father be,
And so I say, I'll cut the causes off,
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
Here sheathe thy sword, I'll pardon thee my death:
Exit
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And once again proclaim us King of England.
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.
That mought not be distinguished, but at last
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.
A salve for any sore that may betide.
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him:
And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
I'll follow you, and tell what answer
Why brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
For hither we have broken in by force.
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands,
Comfort, my lord, and so I take my leave.
Where my poor young was limed, was caught and kill'd.
And of their feather many more proud birds,
I have advertised him by secret means
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Ay, Edward will use women honourably.
Had slipp'd our claim until another age.
Now stops thy spring, my sea sha$l suck them dry,
And when thou fail'st--as God forbid the hour!--
He and his forces enter the city
But only slaughter'd by the ireful arm
I cannot stay to hear these articles.
SCENE III. Another part of the field.
You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
Why, no, for he hath made a solemn vow
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns:
Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
And I, who at his hands received my life, him
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?
Exit
And till I root out their accursed line
Have chid me from the battle, swearing both
The common people by numbers swarm to us.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Exeunt
Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.
Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king:
Alarum and excursions. Enter KING EDWARD IV, bringing forth WARWICK wounded
She shall not need, we'll meet her in the field.
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
And that the people of this blessed land
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid,
O, kill me too!
Farewell, my Hector, and my Troy's true hope.
If Warwick take us we are sure to die.
[To WARWICK]  My lord ambassador, these letters are for you,
[Aside to CLARENCE]  The widow likes him not, she
Than doth a rich embroider'd canopy
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
Of force enough to bid his brother battle,
I am thy sovereign.
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.
And when I give occasion of offence,
Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor,
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them:
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen,
You said so much before, and yet you fled.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?
be ruled by him.
And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
See who it is: and, now the battle's ended,
'Tis government that makes them seem divine,
'Good Gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike,
My father and my grandfather were kings,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task?
Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.
I cleft his beaver with a downright blow:
How sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd!
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.
Excursions. Enter RICHARD and CLIFFORD
While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York
But is your grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may:
'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not?
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's,
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
Will follow mine, if once they see them spread,
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner:
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
To raise my state to title of a queen,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul!
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Nay, stay, lets hear the orisons he makes.
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
To set him free from his captivity.
Your highness shall do well to grant her suit,
And heave it shall some weight, or break my back:
So come to you and yours, as to this Prince!
Royal commanders, be in readiness:
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds,
For how can tyrants safely govern home,
And in thy thought o'er-run my former time,
Alarum. Enter a Son that has killed his father, dragging in the dead body
But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
For this amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.
Have other some: why, 'tis a happy thing
But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.
They go up
Three, my most gracious lord.
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
That valiant Clifford, with his rapier's point,
Lords, to the field, Saint George and victory!
Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
Exit, guarded
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
Her suit is now to repossess those lands,
Why, am I dead? do I not breathe a man?
And to my humble seat conform myself.
Fear not that, my lord.
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?
Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.
Exit
What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
[Aside]  I'll blast his harvest, if your head were laid,
Rather than have that savage duke thine heir
Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight,
The gates are open, let us enter too.
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester,
To keep them back that come to succor you:
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
I rather wish you foes than hollow friends:
Who should succeed the father but the son?
Exeunt
O, ten times more, than tigers of Hyrcania.
O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!
And once again cry 'Charge upon our foes!'
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland,
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.
But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic,
We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
It is not his, my lord, here Southam lies:
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be,
Canst thou not speak? O traitors! murderers!
She better would have fitted me or Clarence:
To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.
Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breathed his last,
To WARWICK
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush,
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
Now, Montague, sit fast, I seek for thee,
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
'Tis better using France than trusting France:
To honour me as thy king and sovereign,
No quarrel, but a slight contention.
Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.
Thou pitied'st Rutland, I will pity thee.
Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
you all your lands,
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Enter a Nobleman
Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside,
And never will I undertake the thing
To execute the like upon thyself,
O, is it so? But why commands the king
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Thanks, gentle Somerset, sweet Oxford, thanks.
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.
The lord protector lost it, and not I:
And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wrong'd
Courage, my masters! honour now or never!
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
His body couched in a curious bed,
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
So do I wish the crown, being so far off,
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
They are already, or quickly will be landed:
To signify thou camest to bite the world:
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring,
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury:
A loud alarum. Enter CLIFFORD, wounded
O heavy times, begetting such events!
And better 'twere you troubled him than France.
Fight closer, or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.
'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him:
And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
If it be so, then both depart to him,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
For did I but suspect a fearful man
I have not been desirous of their wealth,
We set the axe to thy usurping root,
Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,
Why should I not now have the like success?
Thy father, Minos, that denied our course,
SCENE VI. Another part of the field.
They quite forget their loss of liberty.
He, more incensed against your majesty
And, if the rest be true which I have heard,
And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
And seize himself, I say not, slaughter him,
Alas, poor Clarence! is it for a wife
Then 'tis but reason that I be released
Against his brother and his lawful king?
Unless the adage must be verified,
Or as thy father and his father did,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
For I have often heard my mother say
And then to crave a league of amity,
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
chance to fall.
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
[Aside to CLARENCE]  He plies her hard, and much rain
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
SCENE V. A park near Middleham Castle In Yorkshire.
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace,
As Henry's late presaging prophecy
It is war's prize to take all vantages,
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.
More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
Or had he 'scaped, methinks we should have heard
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends:
Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?
But as this title honours me and mine,
What! loss of some pitch'd battle against Warwick?
And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
But from deceit bred by necessity,
That's soon perform'd, because I am a subject.
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
This hand should chop it off, and with the
And, as occasion serves, this noble queen
And thou no more are prince than she is queen.
Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Did I put Henry from his native right?
If murdering innocents be executing,
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood,
Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
In choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment,
And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance
For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.
Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
To free King Henry from imprisonment
Which we in justice cannot well deny,
I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.
O cheerful colours! see where Oxford comes!
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
'Tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done,
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
Where is the post that came from Montague?
Who's this? O God! it is my father's face,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence:
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I like it better than a dangerous honour.
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
That this is true, father, behold his blood.
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
Nay Warwick, single out some other chase,
But to defend his person from night-foes?
I see the lady hath a thing to grant,
Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas,
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's,
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly:
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
So fared our father with his enemies,
Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee own,
For hither will our friends repair to us.
If Warwick be so near as men report.
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.
That your estate requires and mine can yield.
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
For how can I help them, and not myself?
To tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived,
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.
Work thou the way,--and thou shalt execute.
Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.
And set up Lancaster. Why, trow'st thou, Warwick,
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown,
That I in all despite might rail at him,
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight,
The more that Henry was unfortunate.
This way, my lord, for this way lies the game.
Shed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Enter SOMERSET, with drum and colours
What is it, but to make thy sepulchre
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause,
But this I know, they have demean'd themselves
That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind
I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself
Please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.'
Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves,
Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.
A bird that will revenge upon you all:
Exeunt
Not knowing how to find the open air,
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns,
May it please your highness to resolve me now,
I am thine.
O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:
The one his purple blood right well resembles,
By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.
No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd
Our baleful news, and at each word's deliverance
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves,
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And now what rests but that we spend the time
And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun,
Who should that be? belike, unlook'd-for friends.
Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun,
Exit
From these our Henry lineally descends.
Then fare you well, for I will hence again:
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart,
And Nero will be tainted with remorse,
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And his well-chosen bride.
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
Doth live again in thee: long mayst thou live
I am content: Richard Plantagenet,
Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
Pardon me, Margaret, pardon me, sweet son:
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
The scatter'd foe that hopes to rise again,
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
To revel it with him and his new bride:
What is the body when the head is off?
Since when, his oath is broke, for, as I hear,
You'll think it strange if I should marry her.
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears,
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
SCENE I. A forest in the north of England.
A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!'
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
Hold, Richard, hold, for we have done too much.
Thanks, good Montgomery, but we now forget
SCENE VIII. London. The palace.
Henry had none, but did usurp the place,
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
Sound drums and trumpets, and the king will fly.
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.
First will I see the coronation,
Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste,
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Silence!
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigour,
I speak no more than what my soul intends,
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves,
Enter a Messenger
That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.
I am your better, traitors as ye are:
To keep that oath were more impiety
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
That cries 'Retire,' if Warwick bid him stay.
Brother, I go, I'll win them, fear it not:
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.
Enter CLARENCE and SOMERSET
And give them leave to fly that will not stay,
To Edward, but not to the English king.
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen:
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
To bear his image and renew his glories!
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.
By spying and avoiding fortune's malice,
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York,
The happy tidings of his good escape.
'Tis sin to flatter, 'good' was little better:
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.
Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.
She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry,
But never once again turn back and fly.
I, that did never weep, now melt with woe
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.
And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,
Speak freely what you think.
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
Stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer?
But now you partly may perceive my mind.
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
In this the heaven figures some event.
Then I degraded you from being king,
Exeunt
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Are at our backs, and therefore hence amain.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong:
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
Were liken'd oft to kingly sepulchres,
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?
I'll tell thee what befell me on a day
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That if about this hour he make his way
Mine boy? not till King Henry be dead.
I should not for my life but weep with him.
That she was coming with a full intent
And set thy diadem upon my head,
ACT II
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
Ah, wretched man! would I had died a maid
Whom should he follow but his natural king?
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
And neither by treason nor hostility
Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
That I may never have you in suspect.
Bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak.
I know by that he's dead, and, by my soul,
Or as the south to the septentrion.
You are the king King Edward hath deposed,
Our title to the crown and only claim
Away with scrupulous wit! now arms must rule.
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.
To whom, my lord?
Your legs did better service than your hands.
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king!
Or any he the proudest of thy sort.
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet,
So 'twere not 'long of him, but being enter'd,
As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad--
And do expect him here some two hours hence.
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
But march to London with our soldiers?
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.
Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.
And now what rests but, in night's coverture,
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
Exeunt
He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart,
'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.
Her words do show her wit incomparable,
his shrift.
And when came George from Burgundy to England?
If any such be here--as God forbid!--
Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request,
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath:
With downright payment, show'd unto my father.
Off with his head, and set it on York gates,
Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
But Hercules himself must yield to odds,
I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:
And now will I be Edward's champion.
Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.
I came into the world with my legs forward:
The flower of Europe for his chivalry,
All that which Henry Fifth had gotten?
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.
ACT III
Alarum. Enter YORK, EDWARD, RICHARD, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, WARWICK, and Soldiers
And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.
How now! is he dead already? or is it fear
You love the breeder better than the male.
Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm,
[Aside]  Not I:
Accords not with the sadness of my suit:
Exeunt PEMBROKE and STAFFORD
And, yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
The queen is coming with a puissant host,
He slily stole away and left his men:
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Nay, whip me then: he'll rather
The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes
The queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
'O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!'
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun!
Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
I will away towards Barnet presently,
Exeunt
But if you ever chance to have a child,
O Margaret, thus 'twill be, and thou, poor soul,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas
But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.
From giving aid which late I promised.
Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard
Exeunt
I'll steal away.
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.
Look, York: I stain'd this napkin with the blood
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
Good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms,
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.
Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp
Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York.
I mean to take possession of my right.
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
By words or blows here let us win our right.
I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears,
By him that made us all, I am resolved
I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
To make an envious mountain on my back,
SCENE III. Edward's camp, near Warwick.
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  The match is made, she seals it
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
Congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV in triumph, with GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and the rest
Enter a Post
O, welcome, Oxford! for we want thy help.
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand,
My mind will never grant what I perceive
And made our footstool of security.
And I to Norfolk with my followers.
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Thou hast one son, for his sake pity me,
It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
My gracious lord, here in the parliament
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
And craves your company for speedy counsel.
While I use further conference with Warwick.
If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.
Exeter, so will I.
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand.
Arm'd as we are, let's stay within this house.
Urge it no more, lest that, instead of words,
And ten to one is no impeach of valour.
Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry.
And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause!
Women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible,
You have no children, butchers! if you had,
And cried 'A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace,
But wherefore dost thou come? is't for my life?
We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates,
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall!
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck:
Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear,
And still is friend to him and Margaret:
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and RIVERS
'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
I cannot weep, for all my body's moisture
Offers to kill her
He was the author, thou the instrument.
And thou mis-shapen Dick, I tell ye all
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
Therefore I came unto your majesty.
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Who by his prowess conquered all France:
The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this,
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd,
Or whether 'twas report of her success,
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!
Stabs him again
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk,
It must and shall be so: content thyself.
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.
I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall,
Should not be able to encounter mine.
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
To do them good, I would sustain some harm.
Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.
To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
Ah, one that was a woful looker-on
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.
The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
You have a father able to maintain you,
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.
He durst not sit there, had your father lived.
I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me?
And with the other fling it at thy face,
I blame not her, she could say little less,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
And chattering pies in dismal discords sung.
Enter RICHARD, EDWARD, and MONTAGUE
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn,
Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend.
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
And many an old man's sigh and many a widow's,
He's sudden, if a thing comes in his head.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, attended, QUEEN ELIZABETH, PEMBROKE, STAFFORD, HASTINGS, and others
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
To cease this civil war, and, whilst I live,
They never then had sprung like summer flies,
That winter should cut off our spring-time so.
No more my king, for he dishonours me,
The harder match'd, the greater victory:
'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.
that Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.
March. Enter WARWICK, MONTAGUE, and their army
And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me,
Stabs him
Here on my knee I vow to God above,
Enter JOHN MORTIMER and HUGH MORTIMER
Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch
And you were sworn true subjects unto me:
child of her.
Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
And I am ready to put armour on.
But see where Somerset and Clarence come!
With bootless labour swim against the tide
I like it well that our fair queen and mistress
And seized upon their towns and provinces.
Plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords,
England is safe, if true within itself?
And thrice cried 'Courage, father! fight it out!'
Alas, you know, 'tis far from hence to France,
Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
The execution of my big-swoln heart
These eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis,
England and France, and lord of Ireland,  and c.
And in that quarrel use it to the death.
Although thy husband may be Menelaus,
Enter EDWARD, running
Saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way:
Say Warwick was our anchor, what of that?
Stabs him
Well guess'd, believe me, for that was my meaning.
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Go levy men, and make prepare for war,
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Exit with the body
No, for he could not so resign his crown
Stay, or thou diest!
Away betimes, before his forces join,
An yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.
Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.
There is no wrong, but every thing is right.
And I, that haply take them from him now,
So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing,
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time,
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Away! for vengeance comes along with them:
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
Unto our sister Bona.
Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York,
Herein your highness wrongs both them and me.
What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn,
To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
Exit CLARENCE, and SOMERSET follows
Which He hath given for fence impregnable,
Had thy brethren here, their lives and thine
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
Thanks, noble Clarence, worthy brother, thanks.
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
No, but the loss of his own royal person.
'Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.'
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.
And for your brother, he was lately sent
She is hard by with twenty thousand men,
Northampton and in Leicestershire, shalt find
Be sent for, to return from France with speed,
This cloth thou dip'dst in blood of my sweet boy,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck.
CLIFFORD groans, and dies
To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.
ACT V
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give:
Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,
Reignier, her father, to the king of France
Before the king will grant her humble suit.
Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news,
Enter OXFORD, with drum and colours
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.
Trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love!
Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford,
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
SCENE IV. Plains near Tewksbury.
He and his forces enter the city
Frenchwoman.
Commanded always by the greater gust,
There's thy reward: be gone.
Is this the alliance that he seeks with France?
Not separated with the racking clouds,
Now in his life, against your holy oath?
So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal.
And with dishonour laid me on the ground,
For by my scouts I was advertised
For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent,
The crown of England, father, which is yours.
By many hands your father was subdued,
Why, courage then! what cannot be avoided
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
Why, so I am, in mind, and that's enough.
And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again,
Will you we show our title to the crown?
We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
'twas for shift.
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father
See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death!
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral,
Dies
Good Clarence, do, sweet Clarence, do thou do it.
Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Were not revenge sufficient for me,
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
In secret ambush on the forest side
Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.
How far off is our brother Montague?
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.
If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.
Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt,
Exit, led out forcibly
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone:
Stabs him
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
They all read their letters
For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out
And heap'd sedition on his crown at home.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
Enter a Father that has killed his son, bringing in the body
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.
Farewell, my sovereign.
I can add colours to the chameleon,
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
Nor to be seen: my crown is called content:
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.
First, to do greetings to thy royal person,
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart:
Away, away, to meet the queen's great power!
And not with such a cruel threatening look.
This is the quondam king, let's seize upon him.
And henceforth I am thy true servitor:
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
The red rose and the white are on his face,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
Such it seems
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
SCENE VI. London. The Tower.
To question of his apprehension.
And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor,
No if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.
And come some other time to know our mind.
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows:
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news,
Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burthen,
Enter three Watchmen, to guard KING EDWARD IV's tent
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them?
No,
Made issue from the bosom of the boy,
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
My father came untimely to his death?
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,
Yet thus far fortune maketh us amends,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.
But far unfit to be a sovereign.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub,
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
with a curtsy.
We bodged again, as I have seen a swan
For I intend but only to surprise him.
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.
Have robb'd my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
He should have leave to go away betimes,
The king was slily finger'd from the deck!
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
And will you pale your head in Henry's glory,
The sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy
Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right,
I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.
And I, my lord, will bear him company.
Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
That wash'd his father's fortunes forth of France,
Down, down to hell, and say I sent thee thither:
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
Exit with the body
Than in possession and jot of pleasure.
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together,
Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost,
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
I mean, my lords, those powers that the queen
Thou art deceived: 'tis not thy southern power,
'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false
And thine, Lord Clifford, and you both have vow'd revenge
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.
SCENE II. Before York.
And to repair my honour lost for him,
And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself,
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
So fled his enemies my warlike father:
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head,
York cannot speak, unless he wear a crown.
Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.
I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.
Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.
Come, cousin, let us tell the queen these news.
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
Until that act of parliament be repeal'd
Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
Before I would have granted to that act.
So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty,
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?
How now! what news?
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
'Tis the Lord Hastings, the king's chiefest friend.
Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!
Lord George your brother, Norfolk and myself,
GLOUCESTER and CLARENCE retire
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way,
What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?
If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.
And both preposterous, therefore, not 'good lord.'
Thou lovest me not, for, brother, if thou didst,
While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more,
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves: we must confer.
It will outrun you, father, in the end.
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
Write up his title with usurping blood.
Away with her, go, bear her hence perforce.
And not be tied unto his brother's will.
I'll leave you to your fortune and be gone
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here,
Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings,
Break off the parley, for scarce I can refrain
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:
Lifting his hand
My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
A cold premeditation for my purpose!
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
take vantages.
See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd
How will the country for these woful chances
His father revell'd in the heart of France,
Ambitious York doth level at thy crown,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.
Be Duke of Lancaster, let him be king.
For trust not him that hath once broken faith,--
For hardy and undoubted champions,
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!
I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
Why, love forswore me in my  mother's womb:
And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.
Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength,
But, to prevent the tyrant's violence,--
For through this laund anon the deer will come,
Therefore--
This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
Like men born to renown by life or death.
'Twas by rebellion against his king.
With them, the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords farewell.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard,
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?
The Tower, the Tower.
To take their rooms, ere I can place myself:
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest,
Chaplain, away! thy priesthood saves thy life.
And in the towns, as they do march along,
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
Of England's true-anointed lawful king.
So shall you bind me to your highness' service.
To-morrow then belike shall be the day,
O brave young prince! thy famous grandfather
And frame my face to all occasions.
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears,
Such pity as my rapier's point affords.
Enter CLIFFORD and Soldiers
And replant Henry in his former state.
And all my followers to the eager foe
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:
With promise of high pay and great rewards:
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed,
Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.
But I have reasons strong and forcible.
And either victory, or else a grave.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
How many children hast thou, widow? tell me.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  He is the bluntest wooer in
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
And I the rather wean me from despair
Now therefore let us hence, and lose no hour,
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock?
He stamps with his foot and the soldiers show themselves
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
But in the night or in the time of war.
Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
Like one that stands upon a promontory,
Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,
Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York,
I speak not this as doubting any here
I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.
So York may overlook the town of York.
Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.
The very beams will dry those vapours up,
Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee,
Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
I prithee, give no limits to my tongue:
And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?
Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car,
And brought desired help from Burgundy:
When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!
But such as I, without your special pardon,
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
And now, to add more measure to your woes,
But whither shall we then?
Had left no mourning widows for our death,
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
Ay, but give me worship and quietness,
Alarum. Enter KING HENRY VI alone
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
But, stay: what news? Why comest thou in such post?
Before a true and lawful magistrate,
Master lieutenant, now that God and friends
Is thither gone, to crave the French king's sister
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out,
Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
Alas, I am not coop'd here for defence!
Measure for measure must be answered.
Exit Lieutenant
Enter KING EDWARD IV and a Huntsman with him
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Or did he make the jest against his will?
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
What talk you of debating? in few words,
I make you both protectors of this land,
That's not my fear, my meed hath got me fame:
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
Neither the king, nor he that loves him best,
Here they bear away his body. Exeunt
And I am ready to put armour on.'
To go with us unto the officers.
'O, farewell, Warwick!'
Nay, when? strike now, or else the iron cools.
Let's levy men, and beat him back again.
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
If she have time to breathe be well assured
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind,
Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
For yet I am not look'd on in the world.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
The Earl of Warwick and the duke enforced me.
Post blows a horn within
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand.
My royal father, cheer these noble lords
Is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn oath?
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father.
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
God forgive my sins, and pardon thee!
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.
Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.
Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.
Yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike,
What then remains, we being thus arrived
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
And there's for twitting me with perjury.
Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
We are true subjects to the king, King Edward.
To shape my legs of an unequal size,
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
The want thereof makes thee abominable:
Who goes there?
And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
Within whose circuit is Elysium
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Why then it sorts, brave warriors, let's away.
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain,
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.
Richard, I bear thy name, I'll venge thy death,
To play the broker in mine own behalf,
I hope all's for the best.
I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.'
Drum heard
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands,
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
And now to London with triumphant march,
The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth:
This is his tent, and see where stand his guard.
The good old man would fain that all were well,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's,
Even now forsake me, and of all my lands
My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.
At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Yea, is it so?
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
For love of Edward's offspring in my womb:
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Suppose that I am now my father's mouth,
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
And yet, between my soul's desire and me--
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.
To Henry's body, and supply his place,
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
And yet the king not privy to my drift,
Unsheathe your sword, good father, cry 'Saint George!'
Then is my sovereign slain?
Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.
That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, QUEEN ELIZABETH,  CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, a Nurse with the young Prince, and Attendants
To whom the heavens in thy nativity
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!
Or nourish'd him as I did with my blood,
Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.
For what, lieutenant? for well using me?
Take that, thou likeness of this railer here.
Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
Enter a Messenger
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!
When this is known, then to divide the times:
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
So many hours must I take my rest,
Dies
He hath good usage and great liberty,
What, doth she swoon? use means for her recovery.
Exeunt
And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile.
And hearten those that fight in your defence:
Come, son, away, we may not linger thus.
To set the crown once more on Henry's head:
And tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop,
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
So would you be again to Henry,
By living low, where fortune cannot hurt me,
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.
And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.
I'll never pause again, never stand still,
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.
Bishop, farewell: shield thee from Warwick's frown,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.
Go home to bed, and like the owl by day,
SCENE III. Field of battle betwixt Sandal Castle and Wakefield.
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?
Resolve thee, Richard, claim the English crown.
Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood,
An easy task, 'tis but to love a king.
To triumph, like an Amazonian trull,
wears the marble.
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
And wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.
Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower,
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
Enter WARWICK, the Mayor of Coventry, two Messengers, and others upon the walls
And that is more than I will yield unto:
He be as miserably slain as I.
Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?
O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
March: flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers
For we were subjects but while you were king.
Dare not relate.
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
And take the great-grown traitor unawares:
That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?
Wouldst have me weep? why, now thou hast thy will:
Peace, thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.
Your brother Richard mark'd him for the grave:
Why, Clarence, to myself.
Guess thou the rest, King Edward's friends must down,
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?
And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea,
SCENE VII. London. The palace.
But I return his sworn and mortal foe:
Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live,
Ah, hark! the fatal followers do pursue,
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And this word 'love,' which graybeards call divine,
These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies:
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
Enter QUEEN MARGARET and PRINCE EDWARD
If this foul deed were by to equal it:
And be you silent and attentive too,
[Aside to CLARENCE]  You shall have four, if you'll
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.
You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.
King Henry and the prince his son are gone:
And turn'd my captive state to liberty,
How many hours bring about the day,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
The sun shines hot, and, if we use delay,
The sight of any of the house of York
Let us assail the family of York.
Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee:
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick,
Is of a king become a banish'd man,
Great Albion's queen in former golden days:
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks,
Whom I encounter'd as the battles join'd.
My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Cannot be cured by words, therefore be still.
WARWICK and the rest cry all, 'Warwick! Warwick!'  and set upon the Guard, who fly, crying, 'Arm! arm!' WARWICK and the rest following them
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renown'd
For every cloud engenders not a storm.
O passing traitor, perjured and unjust!
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, CLIFFORD, NORTHUMBERLAND, WESTMORELAND, EXETER, and the rest
Hold, valiant Clifford! for a thousand causes
Or whether he be 'scaped away or no
Thou call'dst me king.
Yet, to have join'd with France in such alliance
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
O Ned, sweet Ned! speak to thy mother, boy!
Yet in this one thing let me blame your grace,
That I was not ignoble of descent,
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
Ay, but he's dead: off with the traitor's head,
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us:
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.
Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
Sit down with us: it ill befits thy state
He and his forces enter the city
Enter a Messenger
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
The midwife wonder'd and the women cried
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
And this for Rutland, both bound to revenge,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me?
'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled:
To make a shambles of the parliament-house!
O, may such purple tears be alway shed
We, having now the best at Barnet field,
But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
Alarum. Excursions. Enter WARWICK
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!
Your right depends not on his life or death.
They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,
To wife for Edward: if this news be true,
And shall have your will, because our king:
Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.
In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you:
With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
Nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies.
That if our queen and this young prince agree,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam,
A crown for York! and, lords, bow low to him:
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
How many days will finish up the year,
Well hast thou spoken, cousin: be it so.
What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
And make him, naked, foil a man at arms.
And utter ruin of the house of York.
So that we fled, the king unto the queen,
For King of England shalt thou be proclaim'd
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
That things ill-got had ever bad success?
Welcome, good Clarence, this is brotherlike.
In every borough as we pass along,
Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.
They that stabb'd Caesar shed no blood at all,
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, God forbid your grace should be forsworn.
Thy father hath.
As being well content with that alone.
Is prisoner to the bishop here, at whose hands
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us:
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade,
The owl shriek'd at thy birth,--an evil sign,
This shall assure my constant loyalty,
Bearing the king in my behalf along,
Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love,
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
Whose father bears the title of a king,--
And many an orphan's water-standing eye--
But all in vain, they had no heart to fight,
We are advertised by our loving friends
Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?
And who durst mine when Warwick bent his brow?
Was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me,
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.
He faints
Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st:
Will apprehend you as his enemy.
Come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap,
Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!
I have no brother, I am like no brother,
Hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume,
Ay, but the case is alter'd:
Farewell, my gracious lord, I'll to my castle.
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had.
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
Strike up the drum, cry 'Courage!' and away.
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks
What news, my friend?
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms, split my breast.
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Go, bear them hence, I will not hear them speak.
Why ask I that? my mangled body shows,
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!
Exeunt
Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope,
And birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:
His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.
It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.
For matching more for wanton lust than honour,
Never, O never shall I see more joy!
Instead whereof let this supply the room:
SCENE VI. London. The Tower.
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
My Lord of Warwick, hear me but one word:
Here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Lest in our need he might infect another
And, in this resolution, I defy thee,
That robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen,
Or die renowned by attempting it.
A little fire is quickly trodden out,
Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give,
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.
A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!
Take on with me and ne'er be satisfied!
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.
With powerful policy strengthen themselves,
Tears then for babes, blows and revenge for me
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
O miserable thought! and more unlikely
But is he gracious in the people's eye?
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.
I should lament thy miserable state.
I know I am too mean to be your queen,
And, ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face,
Enter GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and STANLEY
True, my good lord, I know you for no less.
If you be king, why should not I succeed?
And say 'Alas, it was a piteous deed!'
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done:
What are they that fly there?
We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down,
Is proclamation made, that who finds Edward
What fates impose, that men must needs abide,
For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride?
Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.
Enter a Post
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.
Marry, and shall.
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick,
And, Henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do,
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Myself in person will straight follow you.
Flourish. Exeunt
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
For Edward will defend the town and thee,
Nay, stay, Sir John, awhi le, and we'll debate
For hunting was his daily exercise.
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece
Enter soldiers, with PRINCE EDWARD
Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love,
For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
Tread on the sand, why, there you quickly sink:
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
For, though before his face I speak the words
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
And long live thou and these thy forward sons!
Seeking a way and straying from the way,
'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd.
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
I prithee, grieve, to make me merry, York.
Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night,
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
I'll throw thy body in another room
Ready to fight, therefore be resolute.
Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.
I spy a black, suspicious, threatening cloud,
Richard and Hastings: let them go, here is The duke.
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
As shall revenge his death before I stir.
To save at least the heir of Edward's right:
On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.
Bestride the rock, the tide will wash you off,
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
But when the duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Whose top-branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading tree
Should not become my wife and England's queen.
And very well appointed, as I thought,
One way or other, she is for a king,
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
And yet too good to be your concubine.
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Till storms be past of civil enmity.
Becomes your enemy, for mocking him
That carries no impression like the dam.
Than Jephthah's, when he sacrificed his daughter.
They lead him out forcibly
To blot out me, and put his own son in.
These news I must confess are full of grief,
Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
I'll undertake to land them on our coast
That is my office, for my father's sake.
Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers
And Montague our topmost, what of him?
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go,
We charge you, in God's name, and the king's,
That this his love was an eternal plant,
What, shall we suffer this? let's pluck him down:
Butchers and villains! bloody cannibals!
She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
Yet I confess that often ere this day,
Flourish and march. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and soldiers
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.
To England's king in lawful marriage.
And in this covert will we make our stand,
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
I'll hear no more: die, prophet in thy speech:
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET,  PRINCE EDWARD, CLIFFORD, and NORTHUMBERLAND, with drum and trumpets
Hew down and fell the hardest-timber'd oak.
Withhold revenge, dear God! 'tis not my fault,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.
Five men to twenty! though the odds be great,
What else? and that succession be determined.
When I was crown'd I was but nine months old.
His lands then seized on by the conqueror:
But 'twas ere I was born.
Brother, give me thy hand, and, gentle Warwick,
But be it as it may: I here entail
SCENE II. A field of battle near Barnet.
'Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.
They descend
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
I'll write unto them and entreat them fair.
Enter a Post
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
And I choose Clarence only for protector.
I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.
Thereby to see the minutes how they run,
Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Thou art as opposite to every good
To cross me from the golden time I look for!
Plantagenet! I come, Plantagenet!
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, WARWICK, MONTAGUE, CLARENCE, EXETER, and OXFORD
How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
Richard cried 'Charge! and give no foot of ground!'
Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.
Then, since this earth affords no joy to me,
Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device
Why, then thou art an executioner.
For God's sake, take away this captive scold.
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.
Above the border of this horizon,
Alarum. Retreat. Excursions. Exeunt
For by that loss I will not purchase them.
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
Thy son I kill'd for his presumption.
So doth the cony struggle in the net.
Weep, wretched man, I'll aid thee tear for tear,
Hath placed thy beauty's image and thy virtue.
Flourish
I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!
Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
And Somerset another goodly mast?
But by thy help to this distressed queen?
By such invention as I can devise?
Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse,
Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.
For yet is hope of life and victory.
So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons,
Even in the chair of state: belike he means,
That sought to be encompass'd with your crown:
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
Upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
March'd toward Saint Alban's to intercept the queen,
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
But, God he knows, thy share thereof is small:
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood:
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.
Which held three dearly as his soul's redemption,
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.
Patience is for poltroons, such as he:
My heart for anger burns, I cannot brook it.
A short alarum within
And so I was, which plainly signified
Or by his foe surprised at unawares:
To QUEEN MARGARET
I will not ruinate my father's house,
O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered:
As the Antipodes are unto us,
And make him of like spirit to himself.
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop
A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
Some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers,
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers,
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Therefore, that I may conquer fortune's spite
O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
I would your highness would depart the field:
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence,
Let us be back'd with God and with the seas
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
How many years a mortal man may live.
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise:
No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine,
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Exeunt King Edward and his company. March. Warwick and his company follow
That Margaret your queen and my son Edward
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Yea even my foes will shed fast-falling tears,
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
But did you never swear, and break an oath?
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
And thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.
Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.
Cheer'd up the drooping army, and himself,
For this is thine and not King Henry's heirs'
Beseeching thee, if with they will it stands
Let him depart before we need his help.
If not, the city being but of small defence,
His currish riddles sort not with this place.
But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
'Warwick, revenge! brother, revenge my death!'
Did I forget that by the house of York
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.'
Who crown'd the gracious duke in high despite,
Ah, froward Clarence! how evil it beseems thee
His statutes cancell'd and his treasure spent,
Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed:
Broach'd with the steely point of Clifford's lance,
So part we sadly in this troublous world,
Should leave the helm and like a fearful lad
And all those friends that deign to follow me.
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
he keeps the wind!
Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne,
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount
A man at least, for less I should not be,
Think'st thou I am an executioner?
Thy brother Edward, and thyself the sea
No, I can better play the orator.
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay:
In sign of truth, I kiss your highness' hand.
ACT IV
King Edward's fruit, true heir to the English crown.
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
My brother Montague shall post to London:
And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?
It shall be so, he shall to Brittany.
Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.
Be it with resolution then to fight.
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings:
I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
As victors wear at the Olympian games:
Be resident in men like one another
Will issue out again and bid us battle:
And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
Go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!
That Edward shall be fearful of his life,
Which traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
March. Enter MONTGOMERY, with drum and soldiers
Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,
What, not an oath? nay, then the world goes hard
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
That as Ulysses and stout Diomede
friendship
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
The queen from France hath brought a puissant power:
I lay me down a little while to breathe,
In blood of those that had encounter'd him:
Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
As well as Lewis of France, or the Earl of Warwick,
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,
Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears,
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.
Our battles join'd, and both sides fiercely fought:
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
You shall have aid.
Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.
His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Ay, widow? then I'll warrant
Your princely father and my loving lord!
Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest,
Her sighs will make a battery in his breast,
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground,
The drum playing and trumpet sounding, reenter  WARWICK, SOMERSET, and the rest, bringing KING  EDWARD IV out in his gown, sitting in a chair. RICHARD and HASTINGS fly over the stage
'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I long till Edward fall by war's mischance,
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
And blow it to the source from whence it came:
I am commanded, with your leave and favour,
But sever'd in a pale clear-shining sky.
Alarum. Exeunt
What say'st thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?
and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet,
Enter QUEEN MARGARET, CLIFFORD, NORTHUMBERLAND, PRINCE EDWARD, and Soldiers
SCENE IV. London. The palace.
Enter WARWICK
Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
In them I trust, for they are soldiers,
For who lived king, but I could dig his grave?
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief,
King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven,
The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever,
Exeunt Oxford and Somerset, guarded
My sovereign liege, no letters, and few words,
He was a man, this, in respect, a child:
That with the king here resteth in his tent?
The foe is merciless, and will not pity,
I shall be, if I claim by open war.
And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.
Would more have strengthen'd this our commonwealth
And yet methinks your grace hath not done well,
Shame on himself! for my desert is honour:
And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards
But let me see: is this our foeman's face?
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Sprawl'st thou? take that, to end thy agony.
And, whiles I live, to account this world but hell,
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, CLARENCE, WARWICK,  SOMERSET, HENRY OF RICHMOND, OXFORD, MONTAGUE, and Lieutenant of the Tower
Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother,
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Thy father slew my father, therefore, die.
Women and children of so high a courage,
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither,
March. Enter EDWARD, GEORGE, RICHARD, WARWICK, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, and Soldiers
give her two.
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.
And we in them no hope to win the day,
Alas! how should you govern any kingdom,
The next degree is England's royal throne,
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head,
To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion
Flattering me with impossibilities.
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.
No, mighty King of France: now Margaret
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  When he was made a shriver,
My lords, before it pleased his majesty
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate!
What! can so young a thorn begin to prick?
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it,
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
Enter a Messenger
Mount you, my lord, towards Berwick post amain:
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
[To BONA]  And, gracious madam, in our king's behalf,
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Better do so than tarry and be hang'd.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
They lay hands on YORK, who struggles
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet embrace him.
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest,
The sands are number'd that make up my life,
Yorkshire.
My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,
You promised knighthood to our forward son:
At my depart, these were his very words:
The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
From London by the king was I press'd forth,
Or else you famish, that's a threefold death.
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,
I mean, in bearing weight of government,
But set his murdering knife unto the root
And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
Can set the duke up in despite of me.
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
'Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
For all the rest is held at such a rate
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart:
And made him to resign his crown perforce.
Where sits deformity to mock my body,
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
By this account then Margaret may win him,
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
Sound trumpets! let our bloody colours wave!
Long live Edward the Fourth!
Is either slain or wounded dangerously,
Yet let us all together to our troops,
Here burns my candle out, ay, here it dies,
Warwick is chancellor and the lord of Calais,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Or live in peace abandon'd and despised!
Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,
SCENE VII. Before York.
Attend me, lords. The proud insulting queen,
No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay:
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! dare you speak?
Torment myself to catch the English crown:
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
As for the brat of this accursed duke,
Sweet father, do so, set it on your head.
Under the colour of his usual game,
From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.
And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.
I am his king, and he should bow his knee,
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone:
What may befall him, to his harm and ours:
And what God will, that let your king perform,
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.
By so much is the wonder in extremes.
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
This oath I willingly take and will perform.
Our people and our peers are both misled,
But wherefore stay we? 'tis no time to talk.
Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
But thou preferr'st thy life before thine honour:
Or fortune given me measure of revenge.
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
And two Northumberlands, two braver men
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.
And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him,
And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds,
So many hours must I contemplate,
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
No, if I digg'd up thy forefathers' graves
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy:
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind,
Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
To go along with us, for as we think,
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace:
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
To see these honours in possession.
March'd through the city to the palace gates.
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.
Richard, enough, I will be king, or die.
See that he be convey'd unto the Tower:
That I must yield my body to the earth
And where's that valiant crook-back prodigy,
Lays his hand on his head
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
And I the house of York.
What! has your king married the Lady Grey!
Throw up thine eye! see, see what showers arise,
SCENE III. A field of battle between Towton and Saxton, in
What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal-day,
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
But sound the trumpets, and about our task.
Because thy father Henry did usurp,
Erroneous, mutinous and unnatural,
As may appear by Edward's good success,
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair,
Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and LADY GREY
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow:
And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend.
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury:
This is the palace of the fearful king,
Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
Enter OXFORD and SOMERSET
We might recover all our loss again,
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean:
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.
And raise his issue, like a loving sire,
Be valiant and give signal to the fight.
That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.
And Somerset, with Oxford fled to her:
And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies,
Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.
About that which concerns your grace and us,
Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help,
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?
Intend here to besiege you in your castle:
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile!
With resolution, wheresoe'er I meet thee--
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
When as the enemy hath been ten to one:
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown,
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.
Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.
Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?
Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays,
That they'll take no offence at our abuse.
I came to serve a king and not a duke.
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.
Enter SIR JOHN SOMERVILLE
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:
Methinks, 'tis prize enough to be his son.
Many a battle have I won in France,
Exeunt YORK, EDWARD, EDMUND, GEORGE, RICHARD,  WARWICK, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, their Soldiers, and Attendants
What, wilt thou not? then, Clarence, do it thou.
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?
That Henry liveth still: but were he dead,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee,
And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
My thoughts aim at a further matter, I
We'll all assist you, he that flies shall die.
Exeunt
For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say,
[Aside]  I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
The army of the queen hath got the field:
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.
So many days my ewes have been with young,
'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.
Muster'd my soldiers, gather'd flocks of friends,
And I,--like one lost in a thorny wood,
Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen,
Let me give humble thanks for all at once.
Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let's away,
Call him my king by whose injurious doom
For he that interrupts him shall not live.
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?
From France?
Thou camest--
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold:
And warriors faint! why, 'twere perpetual shame.
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
By this I challenge him to single fight.
For in the marches here we heard you were,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.
That will encounter with our glorious sun,
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
For I have heard that she was there in place.
For shame! leave Henry, and call Edward king.
I, Daedalus, my poor boy, Icarus,
Offer their own lives in their young's defence?
My lords, forbear this talk, here comes the king.
A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day,
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Ah, Exeter!
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
Is far beyond a prince's delicates,
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
And yet shalt thou be safe? such safety finds
But buckle with thee blows, twice two for one.
Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle,
May be possessed with some store of crowns,
Enter MONTAGUE with drum and colours
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk,
And not in me: I am myself alone.
And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?
I thought no less: it is his policy
And sit thee by our side:
Your highness aims at, if I aim aright.
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Now, for this night, let's harbour here in York,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind,
And rear it in the place your father's stands.
Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
Speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee,
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword:
Alarums. Enter RUTLAND and his Tutor
And he that will not fight for such a hope.
Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
What will your grace have done with Margaret?
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
If he were seated as King Edward is.
As if a channel should be call'd the sea,--
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York,
As likely to be blest in peace and war,
O unbid spite! is sportful Edward come?
ACT I
Call Edward king and at his hands beg mercy?
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.
Now my soul's palace is become a prison:
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
For, till I see them here, by doubtful fear
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself:
In following this usurping Henry.
And see him seated in the regal throne.
Have caused him, by new act of parliament,
Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees,
Thou hast spoke too much already: get thee gone.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
Re-purchased with the blood of enemies.
My love and fear glued many friends to thee,
Laugh'd in his face, and when with grief he wept,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
What, with five thousand men?
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.
My title's good, and better far than his.
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.
I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.
Here in this country, where we now remain.
Is prisoner to the foe, his state usurp'd,
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
But in this troublous time what's to be done?
It is: and lo, where youthful Edward comes!
To make this shameless callet know herself.
SCENE II. Sandal Castle.
And why not queen?
And I unto the sea from whence I came.
By that false woman, as this king by thee.
Exit
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell,
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
Thou art not here: murder is thy alms-deed,
And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
And call them pillars that will stand to us,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
What now remains, my lords, for us to do
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?
Christendom.
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me,
[Aside]  But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
And see our gentle queen how well she fares:
And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,
Here comes a man, let's stay till he be past.
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.
How now, my lord! what hap? what hope of good?
Thou canst not, son, it is impossible.
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster?
Stabs him
That to my foes this body must be prey,
So God help Montague as he proves true!
And we shall have more wars before 't be long.
And now to London all the crew are gone,
For on thy fortune I repose myself.
The army of the queen mean to besiege us.
Ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound,
knits her brows.
As, deathmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!
A good traveller is something at the latter end of a
Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped.
Perchance he's hurt i' the battle.
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Sir?
scratched.
Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty:
Enter HELENA and Widow
move under the influence of the most received star,
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
his majesty, out of a self-gracious remembrance, did
fleshes his will in the spoil of her honour: he hath
If you should tender your supposed aid,
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.
Why, I say nothing.
are forfeited to me, and my honour's paid to him. He
I do beg your good will in this case.
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss:
Of youth and ignorance, both my revenge and hate
BERTRAM.
My royal fox could reach them: I have seen a medicine
been truth, sir.
Exit, guarded
She knew her distance and did angle for me,
Reads
O'erbears it and burns on.
the king, as to be--
Which you will wonder at.
Inform on that.
Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir:
further use to be made than alone the recovery of
O, were that all! I think not on my father,
your lordship.
Without all terms of pity. Speak, thine answer.
paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach.
And writ as little beard.
that I may say in the default, he is a man I know.
A modest one, to bear me back again.
To give some labourers room.
From below your duke to beneath your constable, it
Be not afraid that I your hand should take,
To mine own fortune and inform'd her fully
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
sport out of him: by his authority he remains here,
well: thy casement I need not open, for I look
Why, then, young Bertram, take her, she's thy wife.
Ay, so you serve us
far, would have made nature immortal, and death
Thou robb'st me of a moiety: he was my son,
Enter HELENA
For that is her demand, and know her business?
To what is passed already.
though there were no further danger known but the
harm, save to his bed-clothes about him, but they
repent out the remainder of nature: let me live,
letter: I have ere now, sir, been better known to
will think of thee at court.
Not till after midnight, for he is dieted to his hour.
My lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.
but fare you well.
fear of Mars before it and of his creatures, not
when you find him out, you have him ever after.
First tried our soldiership! He did look far
Not my virginity yet [         ]
the death of the king's disease.
Shall weigh thee to the beam, that wilt not know,
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
There's little can be said in 't, 'tis against the
thy soldiership, will subscribe for thee. Farewell.
With sharp constraint of hunger, better 'twere
What hath been cannot be: who ever strove
On my life, my lord, a bubble.
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
If I do not, damn me.
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
equivocal companion is this!
Prithee, allow the wind.
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither,
It might, but it is not now.
ACT I
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
thou hast leisure, say thy prayers, when thou hast
Exit an Attendant
It shall be so: I'll send her to my house,
Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count Rousillon.
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers,
Faith, I do: her father bequeathed her to me, and
Good Monsieur Lavache, give my Lord Lafeu this
So in approof lives not his epitaph
hundred and fifty, Sebastian, so many, Corambus, so
Worthy fellows, and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.
I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
Do not throw from you: and you, my lords, farewell:
present at his examination: if he do not, for the
What prince is that?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
What's pity?
Moist Hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy lamp,
ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL yet,
My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
rogues are marvellous poor.
Faith yes,
From lowest place when virtuous things proceed,
That he does weigh too light: my greatest grief.
Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.
You love my son, invention is ashamed,
At least in my opinion.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
lord: whom I serve above is my master.
Exeunt. Flourish
Necessitied to help, that by this token
Enter LAFEU and BERTRAM
in a retreat he outruns any lackey, marry, in coming
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
My duty then shall pay me for my pains:
Look on his letter, madam, here's my passport.
Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower,
Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
My being here it is that holds thee hence:
I am for other business.
know my business is but to the court.
his colour: your daughter-in-law had been alive at
You have not given him his mother's letter?
You are too old, sir, let it satisfy you, you are too old.
This is his majesty, say your mind to him:
Worthy the note.
Good madam, pardon me!
That approaches apace, I would gladly have him see
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Derived from the ancient Capilet:
If the business be of any difficulty, and this
Madam, I had.
But it is your carbonadoed face.
And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death
my acquaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge,
Advise him.
great and trusty business in a main danger fail you.
I will no more enforce mine office on you.
Nay, good my lord, put him to't, let him have his
Do not you love him, madam?
thrive long under her? There's a quart d'ecu for
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
sprat you shall find him, which you shall see this
Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive,
believing thee a vessel of too great a burthen. I
find in the regiment of the Spinii one Captain
Is this all your worship's reason?
Let thy courtesies alone, they are scurvy ones.
A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame
Go to, sir, you were beaten in Italy for picking a
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
There's honour in the theft.
[Reads]  I have sent you a daughter-in-law: she hath
Hold thee, there's my purse: I give thee not this
Let it be forbid, sir, so should I be a great deal
And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
the daughter of Gerard de Narbon?
You do not know him, my lord, as we do: certain it
workman, a very good tailor.
O!
What's your will?
With all bound humbleness.
by the flesh, and he must needs go that the devil drives.
On the opposer.
His humble ambition, proud humility,
are no husband for her.
I am sure I saw her wear it.
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
of herself is a good lady and would not have knaves
ACT IV
Well, sir.
Thirty fathom.
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
I am from humble, he from honour'd name,
garter up thy arms o' this fashion? dost make hose of
With musics of all sorts and songs composed
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless!
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Go not about, my love hath in't a bond,
of fourteen, I have known thee already.
Enter three or four Lords
But will you make it even?
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu?
You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
I'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
Foh! prithee, stand away: a paper from fortune's
stranger sense. Her matter was, she loved your son:
blowers up! Is there no military policy, how
I cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful:
But only she, and she deserves a lord
his virtue, which he hath not, he might at some
SCENE IV. Paris. The KING's palace.
To gather from thee: haply thou mayst inform
Is so from word to word, and then you cannot,
That she'll demand: a ring the county wears,
And ever shall
eat, go to, follow.
smell so strongly as thou speakest of: I will
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.
to a whipping, if you were but bound to't.
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
To any count, to all counts, to what is man.
Will you be cured of your infirmity?
out of it you'll run again, rather than suffer
SCENE II. Paris. The KING's palace.
How now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
I hope your own grace will keep you where you are,
Have the like oaths: he had sworn to marry me
Enter a Gentleman
his soldiership I know not, except, in that country
wine: but if thou be'st not an ass, I am a youth
if I were the parson. One in ten, quoth a'! An we
I'll whisper with the general, and know his pleasure.
rapes and ravishments he parallels Nessus: he
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there,
must produce for an interpreter.
You are too young, too happy, and too good,
What hope is there of his majesty's amendment?
Enter PAROLLES
Your business was more welcome.
Florence, of a most chaste renown, and this night he
I say, I am your mother.
What's his will else?
I am undone: there is no living, none,
Many receipts he gave me: chiefly one.
Thou keep'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
That will speak any thing?
an I were not a very coward, I'ld compel it of you:
That the great figure of a council frames
SCENE III. Paris. The KING's palace.
Plutus himself,
And I had that which any inferior might
You are my mother, madam, would you were,--
A most harsh one, and not to be understood without
know straight our purpose: choughs' language,
flourishes, and a poor maid is undone.
But my intents are fix'd and will not leave me.
Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed
Son, on my life,
With what it loathes for that which is away.
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
first propose: his highness hath promised me to do
Yet you desire to marry.
court, but for me, I have an answer will serve all
Else Paris and the medicine and the king
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
Where hope is coldest and despair most fits.
To chide him from our eaves, for he persists
The king's coming, I know by his trumpets. Sirrah,
Enter BERTRAM
Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all
I would cozen the man of his wife and do his service.
bloody succeeding. My master!
Upon your will to suffer.
To the extreme edge of hazard.
This ring, you say, was yours?
But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.
should have play for lack of work. Would, for the
Half won is match well made, match, and well make it,
Which but attends thy naming.
His face I know not.
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
I perceive, sir, by the general's looks, we shall be
By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very
I hear there is an overture of peace.
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber-window:
Carries no favour in't but Bertram's.
of his council.
And answer, thanks: I duly am inform'd
Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us:
must give myself some hurts, and say I got them in
There's four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound,
Is powerful to araise King Pepin, nay,
poll, half of the which dare not shake snow from off
ye pinch me like a pasty, I can say no more.
If ever we are nature's, these are ours, this thorn
Crying, 'That's good that's gone.' Our rash faults
Damnable both-sides rogue!
As 'tis reported, for the king had married him
Do: I'll take the sacrament on't, how and which way you will.
Is her own dower, honour and wealth from me.
To stand on either part.
list of too cold an adieu: be more expressive to
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.
instance? Tongue, I must put you into a
Giving a letter
Re-enter LAFEU, with HELENA
something in't that stings his nature, for on the
I will confess what I know without constraint: if
are, you must have the patience to hear it.
Who cannot be crushed with a plot?
skill in grass.
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
none, remember thy friends, get thee a good husband,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
To bring forth this discovery. Seek these suitors:
And not be all day neither.
Is good without a name. Vileness is so:
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.
to undertake this business, which he knows is not to
Why? that you are my daughter?
An idle lord. I swear.
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Yet, I pray you:
What says he to your daughter? have you spoke?
Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange, that is the
Nay look not so upon me, we shall hear of your
My lord, I am a man whom fortune hath cruelly
Nay, by your leave, hold your hands, though I know
Gentle madam,
And wherefore I am fled, write to the king
PAROLLES.'
Is this the way?
So much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you
I should believe you:
O Lord, sir! There's a simple putting off. More,
Exeunt
not very well?
To come into his presence.
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
of Limbo and of Furies and I know not what: yet I
By this same coxcomb that we have i' the wind,
ACT III
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
When your sweet self was got.
Exeunt
In me to lose.
anew: but I must attend his majesty's command, to
I did so.
No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a
Out of a casement.
I know thou'rt valiant, and, to the possibility of
must die. Come, headsman, off with his head.
promise of his life and in the highest compulsion of
by the king than by that red-tailed humble-bee I speak of.
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
We serve you, madam,
[To HELENA]  The best wishes that can be forged in
In these to nature she's immediate heir,
Was both herself and love: O, then, give pity
taken a solemn leave: his lordship will next
Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now
questions?
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
Enter KING, HELENA, and Attendants. LAFEU and PAROLLES retire
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
No, no, no.
For speedy aid, wherein our dearest friend
Oscorbidulchos volivorco.
For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon
His powerful sound within an organ weak:
Into the service of the time and was
Why under Mars?
Something to save thy life.
which, my instruction shall serve to naturalize
But let's about it.
Hoodman comes! Portotartarosa
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
henceforth eat no fish of fortune's buttering.
in the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty
His servant live, and will his vassal die:
As't please your lordship: I'll leave you.
But wilt thou faithfully?
great a prince as you are.
She's none of mine, my lord.
You, that have turn'd off a first so noble wife,
he had the honour to be the officer at a place there
His name with zealous fervor sanctify:
With his inducement.
A shrewd knave and an unhappy.
Do thee all rights of service.
Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
that had received so much shame, you might begin an
Greater than shows itself at the first view
O, I know him well, I, sir, he, sir, 's a good
Enter HELENA and Clown
inquire further after me, I had talk of you last
sound, upon my life, amounts not to fifteen thousand
He ne'er pays after-debts, take it before,
Save you, fair queen!
We met him thitherward, for thence we came,
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
My house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine,
SCENE VI. Camp before Florence.
You give away myself, which is known mine,
gabble enough, and good enough. As for you,
Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.
such difference betwixt their two estates, Love no
ACT II
Exeunt
practises he hath persecuted time with hope, and
king! in you it best lies, otherwise a seducer
And I will do so.
comes himself.
No, my good lord,
He might have bought me at a common price:
And thou art all my child. Towards Florence is he?
This young gentlewoman had a father,--O, that
his brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.
I especially think, under Mars.
Will your answer serve fit to all questions?
Under thy own life's key: be cheque'd for silence,
this: I'll none of him.
Exit with Soldiers
endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner
No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta
her, not bedded her, and sworn to make the 'not'
be once heard and thrice beaten. God save you, captain.
rarity redeems him.
a leg, put off's cap, kiss his hand and say nothing,
That you may well perceive I have not wrong'd you,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
Our hearts receive your warnings.
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
That is Antonio, the duke's eldest son,
Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
of my flesh and blood, he that cherishes my flesh
But I con him no thanks for't, in the nature he
He looks well on't.
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
Marry, you are the wiser man, for many a man's
horse upon our own wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
Yet am I thankful: if my heart were great,
When he was retrograde, I think, rather.
As oft it loses all: I will be gone,
Her that so wishes and her humble love!
I shall obey his will.
Safer than mine own two, more dear, I have so,
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much,
The time is fair again.
honour, if I were but two hours younger, I'ld beat
You never had a servant to whose trust
That thou art so inhuman,--'twill not prove so,--
I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'O Lord,
SCENE V. Florence. Without the walls. A tucket afar off.
But wilt thou not speak all thou knowest?
may be ten times found, by being ever kept, it is
He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister: for
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.
I think she has: certain it is I liked her,
He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking
So show her merit, that did miss her love?
And write to her a love-line.
They shall be no more than needful there, if they
If you shall prove
I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
leave me: stall this in your bosom, and I thank you
To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool in
Was I, in sooth? and I was the first that lost thee.
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Which, follow'd well, would demonstrate them now
beguile the supposition of that lascivious young boy
A counterpoise, if not to thy estate
For you have show'd me that which well approves
whom I am now in ward, evermore in subjection.
But more of this hereafter. You, Diana,
You are undone, captain, all but your scarf, that
have almost embossed him, you shall see his fall
E'en such as you speak to me.
one be a man of his own fancy, not to know what we
With very much content, my lord, and I wish it
ill together: our virtues would be proud, if our
in my tent.
All's one to him. What a past-saving slave is this!
As high as word, my deed shall match thy meed.
Among nine bad if one be good,
Our means will make us means.
Enter COUNTESS, LAFEU, and Clown
Re-enter KING. BERTRAM and PAROLLES retire
Dear almost as his life, which gratitude
darkness, alias, the devil.
Fall on thy head! Farewell, my lord,
ourselves we publish them.
To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
done? It must be a very plausive invention that
Can woman me unto't: where is my son, I pray you?
Where noble fellows strike: war is no strife
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
Of the last monarchy,--see that you come
A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a man's.
You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine,
when you put off that with such contempt? But to the court!
Is it possible he should know what he is, and be
matter of heavy consequence, I have kept of them
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
I am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
or it is upon a file with the duke's other letters
month's length a-piece, by an abstract of success:
Religious in mine error, I adore
more in your respect.
Ay, with all my heart, and thou art worthy of it.
they say barnes are blessings.
Fall, when Love please! marry, to each, but one!
the woman and I will do as we may.
to-morrow, or I am deceived by him that in such
Exit
After well enter'd soldiers, to return
Ay, marry, is't.
I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee
jades' tricks, which are their own right by the law of nature.
Exeunt all but LAFEU and PAROLLES
hear of it hereafter. But shall we have this
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him,
Since you are like to see the king before me,
Here's a petition from a Florentine,
This very day,
That she which marries you must marry me,
To her, whose state is such that cannot choose
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
teeth and sing. I know a man that had this trick of
After he scores, he never pays the score:
The king's a beggar, now the play is done:
Farewell. Come hither to me.
company to-night?
I know not yet.
So you were a knave at his service, indeed.
But puts it off to a compell'd restraint,
ones I dare not give. Wherefore, what's the
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
And think to wed it, he is so above me:
His majesty seldom fears: I am Cressid's uncle,
My honour'd lady,
How deep?
knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary of.
Extended or contracted all proportions
livelihood from her cheek. No more of this, Helena,
Under Mars, I.
This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.
And show what we alone must think, which never
Unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest.
Already at my house.
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Is this the man you speak of?
Resolved to carry her: let her in fine consent,
I would I had, so I had broke thy pate,
a-foot.' What say you to that?
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords,
philosophical persons, to make modern and familiar,
As thou art a knave, and no knave. What an
Boskos vauvado: I understand thee, and can speak
him to his country for justice: grant it me, O
that every braggart shall be found an ass.
'When from my finger you can get this ring
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Heaven hath through me restored the king to health.
Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd
Enter Widow and DIANA
If they demand: beware of being captives,
Especially he hath incurred the everlasting
Defiles the pitchy night: so lust doth play
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
Pursuit would be but vain.
I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of
Re-enter Clown
has a knot on't yet
Ay, so I say.
Go, tell the Count Rousillon, and my brother,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature:
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Little Helen, farewell, if I can remember thee, I
More than they were in note: amongst the rest,
Look, here comes a pilgrim: I know she will lie at
Exit
he weeps like a wench that had shed her milk: he
'Twould burst at this. Captain I'll be no more,
And is enough for both.
Come hither, count, do you know these women?
My gracious sovereign,
To go to Paris?
'hic jacet.'
He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't,
That in their kind they speak it: only sin
Who? God?
Even as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at
He cannot want the best
It is in us to plant thine honour where
Did you find me in yourself, sir? or were you
We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case
the complaints I have heard of you I do not all
rush for Tom's forefinger, as a pancake for Shrove
As often as I guess'd.
You're great in fortune.
is more hotter in France than there.
my tongue is too foolhardy, but my heart hath the
That you express content, which we will pay,
Let us assay our plot, which, if it speed,
Natural rebellion, done i' the blaze of youth,
I love not many words.
Who hath abused me, as he knows himself,
therefore, once more to this Captain Dumain: you
The king has done you wrong: but, hush, 'tis so.
Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent,
How called you the man you speak of, madam?
Your salt tears' head: now to all sense 'tis gross
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a patch of
happily effected.
You got it from her: she call'd the saints to surety
Of that and all the progress, more or less,
O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
That I protest I simply am a maid.
into seeming knowledge, when we should submit
O Lord, sir! why, there't serves well again.
salad, or rather, the herb of grace.
Will you draw near!
Hopest thou my cure?
Let's take the instant by the forward top,
He gave it to a commoner o' the camp,
Whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with sweets,
Pardon me, madam:
I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you,
And makest conjectural fears to come into me
If quick fire of youth light not your mind,
Debosh'd on every tomb, on every grave
And what impossibility would slay
Obey our will, which travails in thy good:
I quickly were dissolved from my hive,
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
Ambitious love hath so in me offended,
Are words and poor conditions, but unseal'd,
I still pour in the waters of my love
What she has done for me?
While I was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't.
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.
corrupt him to revolt.' What say you to this? what
Distracted clouds give way, so stand thou forth,
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Exeunt BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and army
fain to hang you.
Share the advice betwixt you, if both gain, all
What say'st thou to her?
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he--
I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty
principal itself not much the worse: away with 't!
We, poising us in her defective scale,
That leads him to these places: were I his lady,
Upon thy promising fortune.
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
before, which hung so tottering in the balance that
As letting her pass so: had I spoke with her,
with the young noble soldier.
Of the none-sparing war? and is it I
The reasons of our state I cannot yield,
May justly diet me. I pray you yet,
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Come, sirrah.
Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
Right, as 'twere, a man assured of a--
Exeunt
maidenhood, cannot for all that dissuade succession,
would of--I'll beat him, an if I could but meet him again.
And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's
Wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
What's his name?
That is not the duke's letter, sir, that is an
religion, their heads are both one, they may jowl
language you will: though you understand it not
but by a metaphor.
As it hath fated her to be my motive
From courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
Why, Doctor She: my lord, there's one arrived,
By any token of presumptuous suit,
You have made shift to run into 't, boots and spurs
Exit Widow
to be a friar, from the time of his remembrance to
The rather will I spare my praises towards him:
I pray you.
When it was out,--'Let me not live,' quoth he,
Than for to think that I would sink it here.
O madam, yonder is heavy news within between two
When rather from our acts we them derive
By such a day and hour.
France is a stable, we that dwell in't jades,
much like a cheese, consumes itself to the very
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
time enough to go home. What shall I say I have
Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee,--
'You shall demand of him, whether one Captain Dumain
[To BERTRAM]  I dare not say I take you, but I give
themselves may, but the many will be too chill and
I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.
I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man, to which
What's his brother, the other Captain Dumain?
I have told your lordship already, the stocks carry
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world
So please your majesty, my master hath been an
lady mother I am returning, entertained my convoy,
You had my prayers to lead them on, and to keep them
rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward.
Get you gone, sir, I'll talk with you more anon.
more, a hundred of them.
You should have said, sir, before a knave thou'rt a
The court's a learning place, and he is one--
And, look you, here's your letter, this it says:
so he that in this action contrives against his own
and honourable personages than the commission of your
Have to the full appeach'd.
As thy auspicious mistress!
duke is strong.' What say you to that?
But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
Exeunt BERTRAM and Lords
are.
adversary's entertainment. Now he hath a smack of
I after him do after him wish too,
By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.
All is well ended, if this suit be won,
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
He met the duke in the street, sir, of whom he hath
Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear,
But with the word the time will bring on summer,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
knew of their going to bed, and of other motions,
Till we do hear from them.
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
I'll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
What's he comes here?
transgressed against his valour, and my state that
Now I see
O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum,
more owing her than is paid, and more shall be paid
To a most hideous object: thence it came
As in your royal speech.
Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
The black prince, sir, alias, the prince of
I perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether
Thou hast repeal'd, a second time receive
A prophet I, madam, and I speak the truth the next
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side,
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away,
Titled goddess,
They say miracles are past, and we have our
I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
How have I sworn!
Good fortune and the favour of the king
And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pain.
in tears! The great dignity that his valour hath
I have yielded:
His name, I pray you.
Bless our poor virginity from underminers and
Will not confess he owes the malady
Rust, sword? cool, blushes! and, Parolles, live
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lovest her,
I would the cutting of my garments would serve the
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
That's all the fault: I spoke with her but once
Lose our drum! well.
ho! here he comes, to beguile two hours in a sleep,
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
Tell me truly.
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
I am a mother to you.
be done, damns himself to do and dares better be
deserve at my hand, but we must do good against evil.
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
sorrow that e'er I heard virgin exclaim in: which I
You are loved, sir:
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
When our most learned doctors leave us and
Hark you! they come this way.
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
metal to make virgins. Virginity by being once lost
We will not meddle with him till he come, for his
I have not heard examined.
I think thee now some common customer.
sleeves? do other servants so? Thou wert best set
made in the unchaste composition.
Health shall live free and sickness freely die.
If you shall marry,
Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth:
For I the ballad will repeat,
Ay, surely, mere the truth: I know his lady.
matter. How does your ladyship like it?
without any malice, but to speak of him as my
not: yet art thou good for nothing but taking up, and
What angel shall
Exeunt
Fond done, done fond,
Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
the brains of my Cupid's knocked out, and I begin to
Where did you buy it? or who gave it you?
Exit
ruttish: I pray you, sir, put it up again.
That fame may cry you loud: I say, farewell.
And truly, as I hope to live.
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
The bottom of your purpose.
or no, the velvet knows, but 'tis a goodly patch of
would have suspected an ambush where I was taken?
He scatter'd not in ears, but grafted them,
A braving war.
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
young earl. Beware of them, Diana, their promises,
The danger to itself?
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.
The king's not here.
Go, call before me all the lords in court.
Who hath for four or five removes come short
Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge,
I wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you,
Enter PAROLLES guarded, and First Soldier
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
And more thirsts after.
Expire before their fashions.' This he wish'd,
My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest in the
Both, both. O, pardon!
Humbly call'd mistress.
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
The mystery of your loneliness, and find
Return us thanks.
No, my good lord, Diana.
At her life's rate.
Exempted be from me the arrogance
First, give me trust, the count he is my husband,
In his bright radiance and collateral light
She never saw it.
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.
Tucket
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name
Enter Page
displeasure.
And now behold the meaning.
Gentlemen,
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
I take her hand.
Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair,
sanctimony she accomplished, and, there residing the
You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.
That truth should be suspected. Speak, is't so?
Something, and scarce so much: nothing, indeed.
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
To join like likes and kiss like native things.
all neighbouring languages, therefore we must every
Enter PAROLLES
Mere fathers of their garments, whose constancies
Only in this disguise I think't no sin
she herself, without other advantage, may lawfully
I have seen her wear it, and she reckon'd it
like the brooch and the tooth-pick, which wear not
Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
That dare leave two together, fare you well.
for my life.
And yet I know not: thou didst hate her deadly,
[Reads]  'Dian, the count's a fool, and full of gold,'--
O my good lord, when I was like this maid,
die. I have letters that my son will be here
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord! is't I
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
modesty which is so lost.
Was made much poorer by it: but your son,
My high-repented blames,
With that malignant cause wherein the honour
His faith, his sweet disaster, with a world
SCENE II. Rousillon. Before the COUNT's palace.
strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems
I know not what he shall. God send him well!
her than she'll demand.
Be it his pleasure.
Your pardon, noble mistress!
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
That were enwombed mine: 'tis often seen
Peruse them well:
And boarded her i' the wanton way of youth:
world, let his nobility remain in's court. I am for
Exit PAROLLES
intelligence hath seldom failed.
Enter BERTRAM and the two French Lords
Which men full true shall find,
succession for it perpetually.
derive me ill will to speak of, therefore I will not
[Reads]  'When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it,
And gave this sentence then,
He must think us some band of strangers i' the
undermine you and blow you up.
I knew him.
Flourish. Exeunt
I would relieve her. Had you that craft, to reave
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Rather corrupt me ever!
your old virginity, is like one of our French
But first I beg my pardon, the young lord
belongs to't. Ask me if I am a courtier: it shall
Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?
To prostitute our past-cure malady
Why should he be killed?
makes it soon mortal.
some reservation of your wrongs: he is my good
May token to the future our past deeds.
His love and wisdom,
The nature of his great offence is dead,
buttock, or any buttock.
Come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with
I'll put in bail, my liege.
Traduced by odious ballads: my maiden's name
sequent to your whipping: you would answer very well
His qualities being at this poor price, I need not
Then, I confess,
Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES
thee, in what motion age will give me leave.
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Not much commendation to them.
My reasons are most strong, and you shall know them
Shall be for me, and, to requite you further,
I am supposed dead: the army breaking,
Alas, poor lady!
indeed, he has no pace, but runs where he will.
Make thy demand.
likes. 'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with
I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust
'Too young' and 'the next year' and ''tis too early.'
With caution that the Florentine will move us
A fistula, my lord.
way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find in my
By self-unable motion: therefore dare not
Acordo linta.
You are no maiden, but a monument:
butter-woman's mouth and buy myself another of
I love your son.
I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
For such a business, therefore am I found
Be not offended, for it hurts not him
Bless you, my fortunate lady!
Here is a purr of fortune's, sir, or of fortune's
Haply been absent then.
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
He that of greatest works is finisher
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Come, come, to the purpose: did he love this woman?
That we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.
The ministration and required office
pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my
How, I pray you?
be patient, there is no fettering of authority.
Not knowing them until we know their grave:
you something to know it.
Reads
A plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing of
Must sanctify his reliques. Who comes here?
Why, these balls bound, there's noise in it. 'Tis hard:
EPILOGUE
Smile upon this contract, whose ceremony
interpreter, you must seem very politic. But couch,
displeasure.
Nay, come your ways.
So should you be.
instrument of honour again into his native quarter,
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest,
We cannot afford you so.
thy lower part where thy nose stands. By mine
conceived against your son, there is no fitter
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
lately spoke of him admiringly and mourningly: he
I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited
If he were living, I would try him yet.
Tokens and letters which she did re-send,
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth,
Drum and Colours
If it appear not plain and prove untrue,
Madam, he's gone to serve the duke of Florence:
When I should take possession of the bride,
pausing
Exeunt
There is a gentleman that serves the count
In argument of praise, or to the worth
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
commander, and that with his own hand he slew the
I have it not.
Let the rest go.
deal in evil: he excels his brother for a coward,
A poor physician's daughter, thou dislikest
phrase,--that had the whole theoric of war in the
that I have not ended yet.
Are thou so confident? within what space
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
Would I were with him! He would always say--
dialogue between the fool and the soldier? Come,
SCENE III. Florence. Before the DUKE's palace.
Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he
'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
Let me see: marry, ill, to like him that ne'er it
I know not how I shall assure you further,
I play the noble housewife with the time
Thou shalt have none, Rousillon, none in France,
What great creation and what dole of honour
Both of Galen and Paracelsus.
way.
Wherefore? tell true.
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
is stronger than Hercules: he will lie, sir, with
Exeunt BERTRAM and LAFEU
company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentii, two hundred and
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
But think you, Helen,
pray you, sir, are you a courtier?
Five or six thousand, but very weak and
Which warp'd the line of every other favour,
Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
That she whom all men praised and whom myself,
I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord's
I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir, I have not much
half, but his right cheek is worn bare.
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him:
But one to dance with! By heaven, I'll steal away.
be i' the camp, a Frenchman, what his reputation is
The tread of a man's foot: to the wars!
for a hen! So, my good window of lattice, fare thee
Cargo, cargo, cargo, villiando par corbo, cargo.
Alas! and would you take the letter of her?
The fellow has a deal of that too much,
and then to return and swear the lies he forges.
me, scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
virginity murders itself and should be buried in
Though my revenges were high bent upon him,
may we barricado it against him?
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?
And aid me with that store of power you have
So that from point to point now have you heard
Let death and honesty
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
My mother told me just how he would woo,
Led hither by pure love: which of them both
off his drum in any hand.
I will come after you with what good speed
Enter BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and the whole army
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Safest in shame! being fool'd, by foolery thrive!
The Count Rousillon: know you such a one?
Would in so just a business shut his bosom
He used as creatures of another place
By wondering how thou took'st it.
No note upon my parents, his all noble:
O my dear mother, do I see you living?
many, Jaques, so many, Guiltian, Cosmo, Lodowick,
Your cuckoo sings by kind.
Opening a letter
blown up: marry, in blowing him down again, with
serve him still.
And found her wondrous cold, but I sent to her,
stratagem.
I'll about it this evening: and I will presently
Before you serve.
poor gallant knave.
Nothing of me, has a'?
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.
a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is a whale to
And of his old experience the oily darling,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
In any staining act.
Well, now.
Guards seize BERTRAM
Desires this ring, appoints him an encounter,
A balance more replete.
Ay, sir.
An thy mind stand to't, boy, steal away bravely.
Who's that? a Frenchman?
'tis a withered pear, it was formerly better,
In what case?
enough to make such knaveries yours.
Tax of impudence,
I have delivered it an hour since: there is
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
he says he has a stratagem for't: when your
There's yet one good in ten.
Enter HELENA, Widow, and DIANA, with two Attendants
Away! thou'rt a knave.
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
Our blood to us, this to our blood is born,
carries it: they begin to smoke me, and disgraces
go to, no more, lest it be rather thought you affect
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world
Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine,
cat,--but not a musk-cat,--that has fallen into the
Italian, or French, let him speak to me, I'll
Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.
melted, if you give him not John Drum's
Why, there 'tis, so say I too.
If I be one.
Exit, attended
way: hark! you may know by their trumpets.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Which I have sometime known.
love, as an old man loves money, with no stomach.
Praising what is lost
Haste you again.
Enter a Gentleman
Sear'd otherwise, nay, worse--if worse--extended
Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice,
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught: I
Though my estate be fallen, I was well born,
Whoever gave it you. Then, if you know
A native slip to us from foreign seeds:
Good captain, let me be the interpreter.
tame, and know their natures. Farewell, monsieur:
He does indeed,
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths,
be magnanimous in the enterprise and go on, I will
sir, a father: he that so generally is at all times
In heavy satisfaction and would never
To make yourself a son out of my blood.
I have been sometimes there.
we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves
your ladyship's good will to go to the world, Isbel
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
Poor rogues, I pray you, say.
It must be an answer of most monstrous size that
What the devil should move me to undertake the
She is.
his valour: what is his honesty?
my daughter, which, in the minority of them both,
The honour that he loses: more I'll entreat you
A drum now of the enemy's,--
Know you this ring? this ring was his of late.
Against your vain assault.
God's mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
to-night: I shall beseech your lordship to remain
Thy will by my performance shall be served:
And at that time he got his wife with child:
A very serious business calls on him.
That, having this obtain'd, you presently
Yet never know how that desert should be.
Enter COUNTESS and Steward
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
drudge: he that comforts my wife is the cherisher
Their force, their purposes, nay, I'll speak that
an honest man should have, he has nothing.
better, whilst I have a tooth in my head: why, he's
this I am not certain.
But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
Very hand of heaven.
advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one
her
Enter COUNTESS, Steward, and Clown
grace the attempt for a worthy exploit: if you
I stood engaged: but when I had subscribed
The sun, that looks upon his worshipper,
I could endure any thing before but a cat, and now
office to say is come, was faithfully confirmed by
for young Charbon the Puritan and old Poysam the
A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger:
'Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France.'
soldiers and my young lady!
Lustig, as the Dutchman says: I'll like a maid the
But he assails, and our virginity, though valiant,
Who lent it you?
Ay, my good lord.
Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.
You're deceived, my lord: this is Monsieur
'After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Which I presume shall render you no blame
May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it?
My thanks and duty are your majesty's.
It might be yours or hers, for aught I know.
The air of paradise did fan the house
My fear hath catch'd your fondness: now I see
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.
Why, do you not know him?
both the office of God and the devil? One brings
But like a common and an outward man,
What more commands he?
Is as 'twere born so.
now she sings in heaven.
O Lord, sir! spare not me.
He would receive it? he and his physicians
By sending me a letter? Read it again.
But you say she's honest.
And I beseech your majesty to make it
The main consents are had, and here we'll stay
'But a drum'! is't 'but a drum'? A drum so lost!
To make distinction: provide this messenger:
For present parting, only he desires
My husband hies him home, where, heaven aiding,
More than my father's skill, which was the greatest
Whom I myself embrace, to set him free.
Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
In honestest defence.
what metal this counterfeit lump of ore will be
thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's
delivers it.
Nay, I'll fit you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
one.
You came, I think, from France?
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislikest,
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with
When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts
Bajazet's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
That good convenience claims.
heart to repent. Here he comes: I pray you, make
Did lack a parallel, yet for all that
My son's no dearer.
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
The duke knows him for no other but a poor officer
The help of mine own eyes.
He's shrewdly vexed at something: look, he has spied us.
They cannot be too sweet for the king's tartness.
She then was honest.
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
That pitiful rumour may report my flight,
'Fore God, I think so.
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
Than I dare blame my weakness: will you see her
That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose
They, that they cannot help: how shall they credit
Which is he?
yourselves, no matter, for we must not seem to
Discipled of the bravest: he lasted long,
The congregated college have concluded
this that so seriously he does address himself unto?
When better fall, for your avails they fell:
That I will work against him: therefore your oaths
Some private speech with you.
Your brother he shall go along with me.
Hath the count all this intelligence?
Which great Love grant! and so, I take my leave.
In a most weak--
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honour,
Even so it was with me when I was young:
Exit, with PAROLLES guarded. A short alarum within
To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true,
made all the unbaked and doughy youth of a nation in
I saw upon her finger.
recovered the king, and undone me. I have wedded
qualities were level, Dian no queen of virgins, that
To say I am thy mother? What's the matter,
thee further.
Than our foregoers: the mere word's a slave
Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
Attend his further pleasure.
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt:
Your pleasure, sir?
And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this,
thy tongue. Kerely bonto, sir, betake thee to thy
I prithee, do not strive against my vows:
They say the French count has done most honourable service.
as I said, but more than that, he loved her: for
what things are we!
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.
If you shall please so, pilgrim.
This I'll do for you.
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve
Blessing upon your vows! and in your bed
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
face: if your lordship be in't, as I believe you
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
The fundamental reasons of this war,
This is not much.
Do you love my son?
His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
Are of a mind, he, that they cannot help him,
make title to as much love as she finds: there is
The name and not the thing.
He,
is to accuse your mothers, which is most infallible
That you will take your instant leave o' the king
His highness comes post from Marseilles, of as able
And I shall lose my life for want of language,
kernel out of a pomegranate, you are a vagabond and
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
And by the leave of my good lord the king,
She had her breeding at my father's charge.
Well, is this captain in the duke of Florence's camp?
But you must not now slumber in it.
Mine eyes smell onions, I shall weep anon:
He bade me store up, as a triple eye,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord,
Adoption strives with nature and choice breeds
title age cannot bring thee.
French earl: the honour of a maid is her name, and
I must not hear thee, fare thee well, kind maid,
Her eyes myself, could win me to believe,
Nay, I'll read it first, by your favour.
and debile minister, great power, great
A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.
world's pleasure and the increase of laughter.
As you'll have her.
the Florentine?
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
Enter COUNTESS and Clown
All's well that ends well, still the fine's the crown,
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
He hath out-villained villany so far, that the
nearest, buried a wife, mourned for her, writ to my
That I should love a bright particular star
Exit
morning your departure hence, it requires haste of
And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.
that thou't scarce worth.
If I should swear by God's great attributes,
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
That she may quickly come.
And watch'd the time to shoot.
I humbly thank you:
To the court! why, what place make you special,
Which challenges itself as honour's born
heritage: and I think I shall never have the
No.
He was much famed.
clap upon you two or three probable lies: but we
And helper to a husband. But, O strange men!
[Reads]  'Demand of him, of what strength they are
E'en a crow o' the same nest, not altogether so
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband,
That downward hath succeeded in his house
nose, or against any man's metaphor. Prithee, get
For count of this, the count's a fool, I know it,
For I can guess that by thy honest aid
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate,
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick:
Sir, much like
His taken labours bid him me forgive,
dinner, but one that lies three thirds and uses a
In common sense, sense saves another way.
let it be concealed awhile.
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
Where yet she never was.
base fear, offer to betray you and deliver all the
Tuesday, a morris for May-day, as the nail to his
Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
than lack it where there is such abundance.
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
Re-enter Clown
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
A poor physician's daughter my wife! Disdain
Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say
I thank thee: wait on me home, I'll make sport with thee:
In good sadness, I do not know, either it is there,
And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too late to
And find your grace in health.
You shall find of the king a husband, madam, you,
His equal had awaked them, and his honour,
What of him?
They seize and blindfold him
In that and all your worthiest affairs.
god, that would not extend his might, only where
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin
the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawn
It is not so with Him that all things knows
A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good livery
The story then goes false, you threw it him
Find him, and bring him hither.
Re-enter BERTRAM, guarded
With one that, in her sex, her years, profession,
You saw one here in court could witness it.
but the composition that your valour and fear makes
your lordship.
my wife is my friend. If men could be contented to
Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
SCENE I. Florence. The DUKE's palace.
He must not be my brother.
Mars dote on you for his novices! what will ye do?
hath confessed himself to Morgan, whom he supposes
This ring was mine, and, when I gave it Helen,
Enter COUNTESS and Clown
such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
Exit Steward
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
Marry, hang you!
None better than to let him fetch off his drum,
To have her name repeated: all her deserving
Is there no exorcist
Marry, as I take it, to Rousillon,
With true observance seek to eke out that
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
Ay, my lord.
Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as
I think so.
And she is dead, which nothing, but to close
It is reported that he has taken their greatest
for you did bring me out.
I am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings.
I know you are the Muskos' regiment:
Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know
I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.
Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rousillon,
To-day in our young lords, but they may jest
Exit
When you are dead, you should be such a one
the attempt I vow.
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them:
Take her away, I do not like her now,
Though more to know could not be more to trust,
thought he would.
That which I durst not speak, his present gift
answer to what I shall ask you out of a note.
Than in my thought it lies.
Exit
Stay: the king.
My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature,
My fancy to your eyes: when I consider
E'en that you have there.
endeavours, for then we wound our modesty and make
Of a detesting lord.
Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
In manners, as in shape! thy blood and virtue
thousand salads ere we light on such another herb.
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
may easily put it off at court: he that cannot make
Her eye is sick on't: I observe her now.
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts,
A march afar
Go thy ways, I begin to be aweary of thee, and I
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
A pox on't, let it go, 'tis but a drum.
The ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
nothing, is to be a great part of your title, which
'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me from
Commit it, count.
With that she sighed as she stood,
And this was it I gave him, being abed.
say him nay.
But lend and give where she is sure to lose,
For loving where you do: but if yourself,
Is't real that I see?
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
That gave him out incurable,--
The great'st grace lending grace
Save you, good madam.
able to lead her a coranto.
knot of his scarf, and the practise in the chape of
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife,
question her. God save you, pilgrim! whither are you bound?
performer, I would have that drum or another, or
knave with fortune, that she should scratch you, who
Of worthy Frenchmen: let higher Italy,--
That sings with piercing, do not touch my lord.
Do you cry, 'O Lord, sir!' at your whipping, and
'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
When you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed,
fool: drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will
have now found thee, when I lose thee again, I care
every man should beat thee: I think thou wast
The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother:
[Reads]  Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.
Adieu, till then, then, fail not. You have won
[Aside]  I'll no more drumming, a plague of all
Corrupt the tender honour of a maid:
her education promises, her dispositions she
And hearing your high majesty is touch'd
Exit
Offence of mighty note, but to himself
I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone:
I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace
If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be
lordship anon.
SCENE I. Without the Florentine camp.
And give me mine again.
That with the plume: 'tis a most gallant fellow.
I have then sinned against his experience and
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
You shall hear one anon.
any convenience, an he were double and double a
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
O my good lord, you were the first that found me!
I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves
sure, they are bastards to the English, the French
humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am
I shall continue thankful.
What would you have?
To-morrow to the field.
I'll beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with
BERTRAM gives a ring
little more to say, sir, of his honesty: he has
How do you mean?
That's able to breathe life into a stone,
grief, in fine, made a groan of her last breath, and
So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick:
Howe'er repented after.
Were in his pride or sharpness, if they were,
What have we here?
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
'Twould not do.
That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away
Since the first father wore it: this ring he holds
I am out o' friends, madam, and I hope to have
Will you not, my lord?
But the plain single vow that is vow'd true.
That happiness and prime can happy call:
Given order for our horses, and to-night,
Which they distil now in the curbed time,
that my lord your son was upon his return home, I
Helen, I mean.
Lend me an arm, the rest have worn me out
I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make
My dearest master, your dear son, may hie:
tenderness of her nature became as a prey to her
sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall
A young man married is a man that's marr'd:
I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
It hath happened all as I would have had it, save
this very instant disaster of his setting i' the
All is whole,
You go so much backward when you fight.
It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace,
The inaudible and noiseless foot of Time
SCENE III. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.
damned than to do't?
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
By my old beard,
As ample as myself.
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
I met the ravin lion when he roar'd
The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears,
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
But on us both did haggish age steal on
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
reading it he changed almost into another man.
The same upon your finger.
Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.
From whence thou camest, how tended on: but rest
That she would never put it from her finger,
Send for your ring, I will return it home,
Not one of those but had a noble father.
I am not an impostor that proclaim
Exeunt
That chase thee from thy country and expose
This is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
He shall be whipped through the army with this rhyme
Nay, 'tis most credible, we here received it
Against our borrowing prayers.
They say, our French lack language to deny,
Trumpets sound
Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur: if you
And so 'tis.
If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess
Do you know this Captain Dumain?
almost as great as his honesty, had it stretched so
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
thee, else thou diest in thine unthankfulness, and
Why think you so?
That ministers thine own death if I die.
Exeunt
Turk, to make eunuchs of.
Let us from point to point this story know,
foul the clearness of our deservings, when of
Art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy voice?
Ay, is it not a language I speak?
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
For Paris, was it? speak.
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.
Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might
men, though it be the getting of children. Here
their cassocks, lest they shake themselves to pieces.
By him and by this woman here what know you?
every thing that an honest man should not have, what
By the misprising of a maid too virtuous
A stranger, no offender, and inform him
was skilful enough to have lived still, if knowledge
star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery
while 'tis vendible, answer the time of request.
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
My lord your son made me to think of this,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb,
What's he?
good must of necessity hold his virtue to you, whose
speed well in it, the duke shall both speak of it.
safely be admitted.
In such a business give me leave to use
higher, or return again into France?
When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I am the
[Reads]
That the first face of neither, on the start,
My chastity's the jewel of our house,
Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.
Return you thither?
king's sake, he were living! I think it would be
I'ld give bay Curtal and his furniture,
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled,
There's place and means for every man alive.
flesh, and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
yourself: many likelihoods informed me of this
When I did love you ill? This has no holding,
Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.
Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which late
Discover that which shall undo the Florentine.
Exeunt
bring forth this counterfeit module, he has deceived
Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass,
Fair one, I think not so.
The king is render'd lost.
I'll after them.
Might you not know she would do as she has done,
Exeunt Lords
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear,
This I must say,
Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count
Ay, madam,
These boys are boys of ice, they'll none have her:
Bless this unworthy husband? he cannot thrive,
What, what, sweet-heart?
You need but plead your honourable privilege.
The praised of the king, who, so ennobled,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
And I'll be bid by thee.
certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation,
Is it yourself?
Do not say so.
The wars have so kept you under that you must needs
And are by me with child,'  and c. This is done:
'Tis an unseason'd courtier, good my lord,
You have discharged this honestly, keep it to
thine ignorance makes thee away: farewell. When
In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no
question for your residence.
Nothing in France, until he has no wife!
despair, if they were not cherished by our virtues.
and extend to you what further becomes his
I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for
But till the troops come by,
Inspired merit so by breath is barr'd:
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
clothes, but I am now, sir, muddied in fortune's
pestiferous reports of men very nobly held, can
I beseech your honour to hear me one single word.
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Which might be felt, that we, the poorer born,
No.
From her inaidible estate, I say we must not
withered pears, it looks ill, it eats drily, marry,
doing eternal: for doing I am past: as I will by
your thoughts be servants to you! Be comfortable
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
Which thus she hath prevented.
That it will please you
Err in bestowing it.
My friends were poor, but honest, so's my love:
leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
What is your pleasure, madam?
You may so in the end.
Here is my hand, the premises observed,
wish might be found in the calendar of my past
Methought you said
To you that know them not. This to my mother:
The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and
and on at pleasure.
Think upon patience. Pray you, gentlemen,
Sir, for a quart d'ecu he will sell the fee-simple
created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.
Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off
Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,
Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and calumnious knave?
How could you give it him?
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
pare her nails now. Wherein have you played the
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
worthiness would stir it up where it wanted rather
Mine honourable mistress.
As all impediments in fancy's course
What ring was yours, I pray you?
Flourish. Enter the DUKE of Florence attended, the two Frenchmen, with a troop of soldiers.
Till honour be bought up and no sword worn
But she is arm'd for him and keeps her guard
He blushes, and 'tis it:
Exit
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
We'll take your offer kindly.
Exeunt
I have to use: thy frank election make,
Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts
To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand,
So 'tis reported, sir.
counsel and understand what advice shall thrust upon
Exit
me, like a double-meaning prophesier.
le Grand, which holy undertaking with most austere
As you owe to your wife.
A phoenix, captain and an enemy,
Just, you say well, so would I have said.
Love you my son?
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter,
Boblibindo chicurmurco.
point, so to the full arming of the verity.
birth and virtue gives you heraldry. You are not
will say, 'Came you off with so little?' and great
losing of hope by time.
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
O my Parolles, they have married me!
such volubility, that you would think truth were a
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew,
But never tax'd for speech. What heaven more will,
Exit
With any branch or image of thy state,
Conferr'd by testament to the sequent issue,
I could not answer in that course of honour
set this counterfeit.
SCENE III. The Florentine camp.
files: I would do the man what honour I can, but of
The use of your own virtues, for the which
This she delivered in the most bitter touch of
'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
worthiness.
O Lord, sir! Thick, thick, spare not me.
How is this justified?
carp as you may, for he looks like a poor, decayed,
Oft does them by the weakest minister:
As when thy father and myself in friendship
his company anatomized, that he might take a measure
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged,
leave to in the crop, if I be his cuckold, he's my
Faith, sir, he did love her, but how?
I speak in respect--
Thou diest within this hour.
Where are my other men, monsieur? Farewell.
Find you that there?
His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his
be followed: after them, and take a more dilated farewell.
More than to see this ring. Take him away.
That jack-an-apes with scarfs: why is he melancholy?
He hath arm'd our answer,
stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow
I would have said it, you say well. Here comes the king.
which gentlemen have.
'Tis past, my liege,
Where most it promises, and oft it hits
itself ten, which is a goodly increase, and the
melancholy man.
speak what I know.
prayers. Fare you well, my lord, and believe this
distress in my similes of comfort and leave him to
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!
dishonour we had in the loss of that drum, but it is
true,--or thereabouts, set down, for I'll speak truth.
Of honour'd bones indeed. What should be said?
Five or six thousand horse, I said,-- I will say
The king's disease--my project may deceive me,
highways out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate
hinder not the honour of his design: let him fetch
But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
To talk of your good father. In his youth
Then here's a man stands, that has brought his pardon.
How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our losses!
And you, monarch!
to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine,
For amplest credence.
Such friends are thine enemies, knave.
That ring's a thousand proofs.
The well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure
Vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech
They are not herbs, you knave, they are nose-herbs.
That shall attend his love.
Marry that will, I live and die a maid:
As captain shall: simply the thing I am
Faith, sir, a' has an English name, but his fisnomy
Than is his use.
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
[Reads]  Upon his many protestations to marry me
Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
That I wish well. 'Tis pity--
horns together, like any deer i' the herd.
in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find what it is
Indeed, good lady,
hats and most courteous feathers, which bow the head
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
ask you a question. Man is enemy to virginity, how
which he thinks is a patent for his sauciness, and,
Right, so I say.
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
morning for France. The duke hath offered him
I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
fifty each: so that the muster-file, rotten and
Let that go:
If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray
By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Where you shall host: of enjoin'd penitents
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
That wishing well had not a body in't,
And, though I kill him not, I am the cause
It is a dropsied honour. Good alone
Your reputation comes too short for my daughter, you
What two things?
I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.
Here he comes.
And no.
there to command.
That has done worthy service.
Most admirable: I have seen those wars.
And is not like the sire: honours thrive,
I like him well.
The lass I spoke of.
A pox on him, he's a cat still.
be what they are, there were no fear in marriage,
What is the matter?
His death was so effected: better 'twere
displeasure of the king, who had even tuned his
We'll ne'er come there again.'
too: we shall speak of you there.
that he is?
Holy seems the quarrel
by't: out with 't! within ten year it will make
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a
Pray, sir, your pardon.
Whom sometime I have laugh'd with: let your highness
Ay, my good lady, he.
Take her by the hand,
question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. I
himself could not have prevented, if he had been
A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
Why, do you think he will make no deed at all of
his dagger.
You give away this hand, and that is mine,
Ten o'clock: within these three hours 'twill be
Admiringly, my liege, at first
o' the song: would God would serve the world so all
But that I am your most obedient servant.
Enter HELENA
Against the proclamation of thy passion,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
With strife to please you, day exceeding day:
SCENE IV. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
I hope so.
I do not know if it be it or no.
Sir, his wife some two months since fled from his
great fire, and the master I speak of ever keeps a
With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
Let him fear this, for it will come to pass
Which, as the dearest issue of his practise,
when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won
speak one to another, so we seem to know, is to
Receive the ring again.
This ring was mine, I gave it his first wife.
Since the physician at your father's died?
and between these main parcels of dispatch effected
says, is muddied withal: pray you, sir, use the
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Lady, of that I have made a bold charter, but I
And to be a soldier?
With several applications, nature and sickness
Is here attending: her business looks in her
Exeunt BERTRAM and PAROLLES
Enter PAROLLES
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
discovered the secrets of your army and made such
End ere I do begin.
Unblinding him
For the contempt of empire.
The great prerogative and rite of love,
good fortunes.
old ling and our Isbels o' the country are nothing
Dost thou believe't?
which you hear him so confidently undertake to do.
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
How is that?
that he comes not along with her.
You see it lawful, then: it is no more,
Ere they can hide their levity in honour,
That he is loved of me: I follow him not
If you could find out a country where but women were
Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
like your old ling and your Isbels o' the court:
So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
To the dark house and the detested wife.
held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal,
She hath that ring of yours.
nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to have
To tell him that his sword can never win
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at once
Her heart weighs sadly: this young maid might do her
Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you: let me
And lack not to lose still: thus, Indian-like,
It is, indeed: if you will have it in showing, you
One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send her
and by midnight look to hear further from me.
If there be here German, or Dane, low Dutch,
But this exceeding posting day and night
be born under Mars.
SCENE II. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
O Lord, sir! Nay, put me to't, I warrant you.
In the mean time, what hear you of these wars?
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
the inter'gatories: demand them singly.
most virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had
This haste hath wings indeed.
With all the spots o' the world tax'd and debosh'd,
never shall come off, and show me a child begotten
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields,
The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES
Not much employment for you: you understand me?
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth
To eat with us to-night, the charge and thanking
My master, my dear lord he is, and I
Will you be mine, now you are doubly won?
Exit HELENA
Where great additions swell's, and virtue none,
enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these engines of
The rather, for I think I know your hostess
It were fit you knew him, lest, reposing too far in
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was in
Enter PAROLLES
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring,
I would she did as you say.
You beg a single penny more: come, you shall ha't,
Boskos thromuldo boskos.
But most it is presumption in us when
Come, come, no more of that.
And you.
In what he did profess, well found.
disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin:
with me till they meet together.
I would Poison that vile rascal.
How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
Enter Second French Lord, with five or six other Soldiers in ambush
[To BERTRAM]  Use a more spacious ceremony to the
Hardly serve.
by a gentleman his companion.
Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath
Not to be helped,--
filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the
And these breed honour: that is honour's scorn,
The general of our horse thou art, and we,
The duke will lay upon him all the honour
Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again.
faith, for seventeen poniards are at thy bosom.
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
I know him: a' was a botcher's 'prentice in Paris,
I am not a day of season,
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
ne'er got 'em.
Re-enter BERTRAM
'Tis bitter.
And Florence is denied before he comes:
Till your deeds gain them: fairer prove your honour
With spritely fire and motion, whose simple touch,
Time was, I did him a desired office,
All but new things disdain, whose judgments are
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
lust, are not the things they go under: many a maid
I fill a place, I know't. How long is't, count,
sir, in a dungeon, i' the stocks, or any where, so I may live.
body as when he numbered thirty: he will be here
I am the caitiff that do hold him to't,
My mother greets me kindly, is she well?
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon
That, Escalus.
service is seldom attributed to the true and exact
Good faith, across: but, my good lord 'tis thus,
might have a good woman born but one every blazing
When I have found it. The count he wooes your daughter,
Here, take my ring:
Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
Now, pray you, let me see it, for mine eye,
condition, and what credit I have with the duke.
be swine-drunk, and in his sleep he does little
Now, God delay our rebellion! as we are ourselves,
service: it was a disaster of war that Caesar
She might have been o'erta'en, and yet she writes,
And all the honours that can fly from us
Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of
By our remembrances of days foregone,
behalf of the maid, for I knew the young count to be
You boggle shrewdly, every feather stars you.
He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner.
understand him, unless some one among us whom we
Your distinction?
our unlawful intents? We shall not then have his
soul of this man is his clothes. Trust him not in
I'll never tell you.
What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
Confess it, th' one to th' other, and thine eyes
Yes, but you will my noble grapes, an if
Re-enter LAFEU
traitors too, in her they are the better for their
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
Do you know he promised me marriage?
I mean, the business is not ended, as fearing to
pausing
I have spoke the truth.
Thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.
I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and fool.
Nay, a mother:
Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
What's the matter, sweet-heart?
As if she sat in 's heart, she says all men
him for me, he's more and more a cat.
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
you: let the justices make you and fortune friends:
So is running away, when fear proposes the safety,
The general is content to spare thee yet,
When you sally upon him, speak what terrible
yet his brother is reputed one of the best that is:
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
bate thee a scruple.
would suffer her poor knight surprised, without
I like him well, 'tis not amiss. And I was about to
heart was not consenting to.
overlooking. I have those hopes of her good that
Exit
This man may help me to his majesty's ear,
With all my heart, my lord.
simpleness, she derives her honesty and achieves her goodness.
SCENE II. Florence. The Widow's house.
Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her.
Exeunt
Well, what would you say?
Shall be my surety, 'fore whose throne 'tis needful,
Her estimation home.
going, forsooth: the business is for Helen to come hither.
thee: methinks, thou art a general offence, and
Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together,
Come on, thou art granted space.
comfort, your son will not be killed so soon as I
For I by vow am so embodied yours,
Captain, I will.
For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.
The ring was never hers.
I heard not of it before.
her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows takes all
You beg more than 'word,' then. Cox my passion!
I will tell truth, by grace itself I swear.
on, have them still. O, my knave, how does my old lady?
inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer, for where
Here 'tis, here's a paper: shall I read it to you?
DIANA CAPILET.
professes not keeping of oaths, in breaking 'em he
'had'! how sad a passage 'tis!--whose skill was
questions.
But never hope to know why I should marry her.
O, I believe with him,
Ay, madam.
Of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms,
[Aside to BERTRAM]  O, for the love of laughter,
the report of it. Well, Diana, take heed of this
Herself most chastely absent: after this,
My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.
Ay, madam, knowingly.
velvet on's face: whether there be a scar under't
friar's mouth, nay, as the pudding to his skin.
But tell me then, 'tis so, for, look thy cheeks
Keep him out.
Something in my behalf.
Whither I am going.
unserviceable: the troops are all scattered, and
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come to
He that ears my land spares my team and gives me
increase and there was never virgin got till
I would not tell you what I would, my lord:
him. He was first smoked by the old lord Lafeu:
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims,
This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the
entertainment.
of mine, and writ to me this other day to turn him
At your service.
My love as it begins shall so persever.
kinsman, he's a most notable coward, an infinite and
knows not from the enemy: we will bind and hoodwink
It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
Well, I shall be wiser.
That all the miseries which nature owes
time, there do muster true gait, eat, speak, and
Excellently.
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
save your word.
To give this poor petition to the king,
his spurs so long. How does he carry himself?
A senseless help when help past sense we deem.
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so
Must be digested, give a favour from you
Enter HELENA, Widow, and DIANA
entail from all remainders, and a perpetual
think your mystery in stratagem can bring this
sir!' I see things may serve long, but not serve ever.
ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. I do pity his
And with this healthful hand, whose banish'd sense
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
My wish receive,
I know that knave, hang him! one Parolles: a
men.
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
My art is not past power nor you past cure.
ever lost: 'tis too cold a companion, away with 't!
You're shallow, madam, in great friends, for the
To DIANA
A certainty, vouch'd from our cousin Austria,
I was compell'd to her, but I love thee
To be relinquish'd of the artists,--
greatness, even to the utmost syllable of your
I humbly thank you, sir: a truth's a truth, the
He hence removed last night and with more haste
disposition.
Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a fool?
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
of all treasons, we still see them reveal
Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face,
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Ay, and the particular confirmations, point from
I shall, my liege.
the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.
to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the
thee in grace and the other brings thee out.
SCENE I. Marseilles. A street.
Nor I your mother?
No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor, though
of his act.
[Advancing]  Do you hear, monsieur? a word with you.
house: her pretence is a pilgrimage to Saint Jaques
Exeunt
serve the world for no honest use, therefore you
I see that men make ropes in such a scarre
There was excellent command,--to charge in with our
To what is count's man: count's master is of
Shall on them settle. You know your places well,
There's one grape yet, I am sure thy father drunk
He does me wrong, my lord, if I were so,
Prejudicates the business and would seem
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
Methinks I hear him now, his plausive words
I have spoken better of you than you have or will to
Faith, sir, he has led the drum before the English
If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Making them proud of his humility,
If I break time, or flinch in property
Which I will over-pay and pay again
reports for me.
to herself her own words to her own ears, she
Are motives of more fancy, and, in fine,
Till we serve you, but when you have our roses,
Then go thou forth,
commendations go with pity, they are virtues and
How now! where's your master?
the year! we'ld find no fault with the tithe-woman,
Which on your just proceeding I'll keep off,
that I may repent.
We please to have it grow. Cheque thy contempt:
Upon your grace's part, black and fearful
porridge than in your cheek, and your virginity,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
The incensing relics of it: let him approach,
Exit
Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher: so,
they come will tell you more: for my part, I only
Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING, attended  with divers young Lords taking leave for the Florentine war, BERTRAM, and PAROLLES
It was not lent me neither.
to be proud of thy bondage. I have a desire to hold
Aside
Sir, it is
quickly! the other that she's in earth, from whence
He had not my virginity.
His good remembrance, sir,
What darest thou venture?
May make it probable need.
My name, my good lord, is Parolles.
The dust that did offend it.
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney,
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me,
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Our interpreter does it well.
Deadly divorce step between me and you!
SCENE VII. Florence. The Widow's house.
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
To give it from me.
Exeunt
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
Your highness with herself.
We'll be before our welcome.
You're welcome, gentlemen.
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
I begin to love him for this.
Bravely, coragio!
And mock us with our bareness.
[To BERTRAM]  These things shall be done, sir.
in's forehead.
Thanks, sir, all the rest is mute.
we bring him to our own tents. Be but your lordship
As if his life lay on't.
Enter LAFEU
'spare not me?' Indeed your 'O Lord, sir!' is very
hear your son was run away.
If I had given you this at over-night,
The many-colour'd Iris, rounds thine eye?
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it
Reports but coarsely of her.
with a shame as ample.
Oft expectation fails and most oft there
Have fought with equal fortune and continue
Nor you, mistress,
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
And every hair that's on't, Helen, that's dead,
husband: but in such a 'then' I write a 'never.'
Whereof the world takes note: come, come, disclose
were more than they can commend.
Now, good Lafeu,
Good morrow, noble captain.
many nicer needs, the last was the greatest, but
was in that credit with them at that time that I
know his conditions and lay him in straw. I have but
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?
That you start at it? I say, I am your mother,
No, sir, I warrant you.
Look bleak i' the cold wind: withal, full oft we see
'Tis but the boldness of his hand, haply, which his
travel, it might pass: yet the scarfs and the
virginity was first lost. That you were made of is
What shall be done to him?
This is a dreadful sentence.
What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.
Of what should stead her most?
do you no harm to learn.
she wished me: alone she was, and did communicate
Where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth:
No more o' that,
My mother did but duty, such, my lord,
lord. I'll have no more pity of his age than I
More should I question thee, and more I must,
called Mile-end, to instruct for the doubling of
I have forgot him: my imagination
Yes, good faith, every dram of it, and I will not
That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
Written to bear along.
sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns
What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah:
Exit
Sirrah, your lord and master's married, there's news
and Gratii, two hundred and fifty each, mine own
and much fool may you find in you, even to the
in you is a virtue of a good wing, and I like the wear well.
I never gave it him.
And you shall find yourself to be well thank'd,
I have not, my lord, deserved it.
die, but that, my offences being many, I would
Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this,
all flesh and blood are, and, indeed, I do marry
Faith, I know more than I'll speak.
SCENE I. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
What I can do can do no hurt to try,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine, and yet it is,
Farewell, young lords, these warlike principles
possible, with well-weighing sums of gold, to
He will return, and hope I may that she,
To this unworthy husband of his wife,
Go to, thou art a witty fool, I have found thee.
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour:
Yes, my good lord,
must fit all demands.
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
I would I had any drum of the enemy's: I would swear
Not to woo honour, but to wed it, when
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not:
Brought you this letter, gentlemen?
trust my judgment in any thing.
Before I speak, too threateningly replies:
now. Your date is better in your pie and your
With that she sighed as she stood,
There is none: man, sitting down before you, will
On my particular. Prepared I was not
'Tis pity he is not honest: yond's that same knave
A traitor you do look like, but such traitors
way:
it, there is not one so young and so villanous this
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
coroners of that age found it was 'Hero of Sestos.'
infect yourself with them?
head, and show the world what the bird hath done to
It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
from his mad humour of love to a living humour of
As, by my faith, I see no more in you
And little recks to find the way to heaven
maids are May when they are maids, but the sky
Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met: will you
I would not be cured, youth.
O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!
I did not then entreat to have her stay,
There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!
her: that if she love me, I charge her to love
of two dog-apes, and when a man thanks me heartily,
man as Orlando?
In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
O, I know where you are: nay, 'tis true: there was
Nay, if I keep not my rank,--
But these are all lies: men have died from time to
That the stretching of a span
I would I were at home.
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
seeming, Audrey:--as thus, sir. I did dislike the
for a hot midsummer night, for, good youth, he went
courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that
Let us go thank him and encourage him:
Exit
which his animals on his dunghills are as much
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
but that they call compliment is like the encounter
That can entame my spirits to your worship.
carries his house on his head, a better jointure,
is it a spare life, look you, it fits my humour well,
deed and word? is it a true thing?
death! Two o'clock is your hour?
against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?
Good even, good Master What-ye-call't: how do you,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Did make offence his eye did heal it up.
ACT IV
O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books
speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks
SONG.
furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not
You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
and Caesar's thrasonical brag of 'I came, saw, and
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
apparel and to cry like a woman, but I must comfort
In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:
And how was that ta'en up?
may drink thy tidings.
curs, throw some of them at me, come, lame me with reasons.
I have promised to make all this matter even.
to stay behind her. She is at the court, and no
Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, and OLIVER
in the heart of the world, and especially of my own
To make these doubts all even.
disposition, and ask me what you will. I will grant
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
A stubborn will to please,
Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! not a word?
O excellent young man!
Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.
detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock.
To fright the animals and to kill them up
How if the kiss be denied?
As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!
honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some
Else are they very wretched.
I am glad of your departure: adieu, good Monsieur
should be lamed with reasons and the other mad
But what will you be call'd?
Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
lack of a dinner, if there live any thing in this
than a monkey: I will weep for nothing, like Diana
You to your land and love and great allies:
By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with
other men's, then, to have seen much and to have
Are of consent and sufferance in this.
that I wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's
homewards. Good sir, go with us.
all. I prithee, take the cork out of thy mouth that
Exeunt
That any man turn ass,
And, after some small space, being strong at heart,
And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
You to his love must accord,
Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes
Nor I.
SCENE IV. The forest.
For then he's full of matter.
lamely in the verse.
I'faith, i'faith, and both in a tune, like two
To-morrow is the joyful day, Audrey, to-morrow will
Exeunt
For it is unpeopled? No:
that is, the old duke is banished by his younger
Ay, be so, good Touchstone.
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
What prodigal portion have I spent, that I should
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile
I could shake them off my coat: these burs are in my heart.
Come not within these doors, within this roof
word too great for any mouth of this age's size. To
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
The quintessence of every sprite
years. You have seen cruel proof of this man's
I thank you, sir: and, pray you, tell me this:
twelvemonth to a crooked-pated, old, cuckoldly ram,
Do, good William.
pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and
William, sir.
state, shepherd.
themselves without the verse and therefore stood
Can a woman rail thus?
We shall find a time, Audrey, patience, gentle Audrey.
report speaks goldenly of his profit: for my part,
Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
her? and loving woo? and, wooing, she should
And browner than her brother.' Are not you
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Enter ORLANDO, with a paper
Go with him, sirrah.
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
Our master and mistress seeks you, come, away, away!
and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden
Not true in love?
becomes the ground.
As you love Rosalind, meet:
I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he
Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? and is not
I am but as a guiltless messenger.
Break an hour's promise in love! He that will
Is he of God's making? What manner of man? Is his
To SILVIUS
And have with holy bell been knoll'd to church
Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,
never had any, or if he had, he had sworn it away
And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God
caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in
Why, that were covetousness.
Cry 'holla' to thy tongue, I prithee, it curvets
in the forest.
laid to the charge of women?
you, here comes my Rosalind.
Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside,
Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one
Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
Hisperia, the princess' gentlewoman,
Thus men may grow wiser every day: it is the first
And what wilt thou do? beg, when that is spent?
with the smoke out at the chimney.
An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.
of thee than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen,
Enter ROSALIND, with a paper, reading
of Irish wolves against the moon.
Now, by the faith of my love, I will: tell me
I do beseech your grace,
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws
I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading
matter in the ditty, yet the note was very
They say he is already in the forest of Arden, and
I am: what must we understand by this?
So I do: but, i' faith, I should have been a woman by right.
And you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage
love believe it, which, I warrant, she is apter to
But come thy ways, well go along together,
To ORLANDO
a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the
To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.
How then might your prayers move!
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate:
I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
If you do keep your promises in love
Proceed, proceed	I'll give her.
Calls your worship?
and to that end riders dearly hired: but I, his
not, hold your tongues.
are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a
too for your society.
There I shall see mine own figure.
dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go
it like a fool!
Nay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met
Buy thou the cottage, pasture and the flock,
Did he not moralize this spectacle?
seven year.
As friend remember'd not.
as she is and without any danger.
simply your having in beard is a younger brother's
But what care I for words? yet words do well
What, you wrestle to-morrow before the new duke?
thee, Orlando, for my husband: there's a girl goes
And let me all your fortunes understand.
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
Then to cart with Rosalind.
hadst been still with me, I could have taught my
Winter garments must be lined,
Did you ever hear such railing?
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
[Aside]  I would fain see this meeting.
stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man
Tongues I'll hang on every tree,
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners,
Master, go on, and I will follow thee,
And you within it: if he fail of that,
think him as concave as a covered goblet or a
First, for his weeping into the needless stream,
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:
Are but black to Rosalind.
against whom I know most faults.
Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
If he be absent, bring his brother to me,
runs before her actions.
affection in, it runs out.
O, a good wish upon you! you will try in time, in
And turn his merry note
guides. Who comes here?
Augmenting it with tears.
Now, sir! what make you here?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
you kiss your hands: that courtesy would be
thee, if she will not, I will never have her unless
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
for, I protest, her frown might kill me.
To that which had too much:' then, being there alone,
is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers
Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness!
Helen's cheek, but not her heart,
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
is so admired?
behavior of the country is most mockable at the
Thy tooth is not so keen,
There stripp'd himself, and here upon his arm
hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said
Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the
worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a
They wrestle
Enter CORIN
Sir, I am a true labourer: I earn that I eat, get
men are April when they woo, December when they wed:
if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously
And so am I for Phebe.
Indeed, my lord,
Giving him a chain from her neck
Than that mix'd in his cheek, 'twas just the difference
That is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes
But will my Rosalind do so?
to perform it.
With his eyes full of anger.
love to take thy father for mine: so wouldst thou,
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy distress,
almost chide God for making you that countenance you
from a first.
some little measure draw a belief from you, to do
I kindle the boy thither, which now I'll go about.
A freestone-colour'd hand, I verily did think
none of you hates them--that between you and the
Even so. Poor men alone? No, no, the noblest deer
properly, stays me here at home unkept, for call you
marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,
hath clapped him o' the shoulder, but I'll warrant
Nor I.
less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter, and
him: he asked me of what parentage I was, I told
Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts
They have their exits and their entrances,
Exit SILVIUS
By my knavery, if I had it, then I were, but if you
wit! whither wander you?
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:
Call you this railing?
That in civility thou seem'st so empty?
hope of life in him: so he served the second, and
With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between
won me: 'tis but one cast away, and so, come,
never nurse her child herself, for she will breed
'Twill be a good way, and to-morrow the wrestling is.
court. You told me you salute not at the court, but
And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
man's apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
of a lion.
God 'ild you, sir, I desire you of the like. I
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
for, we shall be flouting, we cannot hold.
Good even, Audrey.
Enter DENNIS
Not to seem senseless of the bob: if not,
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong
Of drops that sacred pity hath engender'd:
his goods:' right, many a man has good horns, and
Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.
And here detain'd by her usurping uncle,
I attend them with all respect and duty.
I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you
thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had
and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow,
Call him in.
Let's present him to the duke, like a Roman
are bred better, for, besides that they are fair
Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a
overcame:' for your brother and my sister no sooner
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard
As sensual as the brutish sting itself,
That do outface it with their semblances.
quarrel on the seventh cause?
nothing. Will you sing?
Of female favour, and bestows himself
me out of tune.
will be with thee again.
duke's wrestler, which Charles in a moment threw him
Your brother--no, no brother, yet the son--
a villain that says such a father begot villains.
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
the beggarly thanks. Come, sing, and you that will
Wherever sorrow is, relief would be:
Why now, as fast as she can marry us.
Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master,
me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's
you can move him.
else be incontinent before marriage: they are in
And wilt thou have me?
his love, his mistress, and I set him every day to
He's fallen in love with your foulness and she'll
of the sight of Orlando: I'll go find a shadow and
The clownish fool out of your father's court?
you bear to men, to like as much of this play as
My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:
You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing?
Else had she with her father ranged along.
married man more honourable than the bare brow of a
holiday foolery: if we walk not in the trodden
And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot,
The duke hath put on a religious life
whence you have studied your questions.
Well met, honest gentleman.
A table set out. Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and Lords like outlaws
There's none within.
If that I do not dream or be not frantic,--
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
That ends this strange eventful history,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers!
books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
of earnest.
Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter,
press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.
and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs
You to a love that your true faith doth merit:
I will your very faithful feeder be
so fair and excellent ladies any thing. But let
Devise the fittest time and safest way
I'll not fail, if I live.
You must begin, 'Will you, Orlando--'
SCENE I. The forest.
Why, what's the matter?
have lost?
Sell when you can: you are not for all markets:
me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I
schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of
'Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune:'
With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that
O good old man, how well in thee appears
Pardon me, dear Rosalind.
at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the
Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
The rest shall bear this burden
Though thou the waters warp,
That one body should be fill'd
extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry's
gravelled for lack of matter, you might take
And then I'll study how to die.
O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to
the other, for all your writers do consent that ipse
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself:
O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown!
Than any of her lineaments can show her.
For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear
they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the
Whose heart within his bosom is.
instrument and play false strains upon thee! not to
SCENE I. Orchard of Oliver's house.
A sheep-cote fenced about with olive trees?
But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but
for, I assure thee, and almost with tears I speak
The soil, the profit and this kind of life,
emulation, nor the musician's, which is fantastical,
Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
village, who hath promised to meet me in this place
had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.
I will tell you the beginning, and, if it please
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:
happiness, glad of other men's good, content with my
you bear to women--as I perceive by your simpering,
Come, come, you are a fool
wonderful! and yet again wonderful, and after that,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
To SILVIUS
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.
that the property of rain is to wet and fire to
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
For in my youth I never did apply
Leaving his wealth and ease,
To SILVIUS
Than without candle may go dark to bed--
that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit: I
estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
these you may avoid but the Lie Direct, and you may
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
understanding, diest, or, to wit I kill thee, make
swoon when he showed me your handkerchief?
And having that, do choke their service up
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's office to
What's that 'ducdame'?
to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human
But I am shepherd to another man
were to put good meat into an unclean dish.
thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if
circle. I'll go sleep, if I can, if I cannot, I'll
What you will, Monsieur Jaques.
As man's ingratitude,
wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery
Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE
Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.
purchase in so removed a dwelling.
policy, I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways:
To ORLANDO
Dear sovereign, hear me speak.
Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
[Aside to CELIA]  I will speak to him, like a saucy
could to die before, and he is one of the patterns
'Come, sweet Audrey:
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
had as lief be wooed of a snail.
fourth, the Reproof Valiant, the fifth, the
Enter CORIN and SILVIUS
Sweet Phebe,--
And faints for succor.
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love:
What colour, madam! how shall I answer you?
mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.
fellow by the leg.
avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven
They have the gift to know it: and in his brain,
By reason of his absence, there is nothing
And by him seal up thy mind,
I would not change it.
would send me word, he cut it to please himself:
And thus I cured him, and this way will I take upon
Where meeting with an old religious man,
cattle of this colour, would now like him, now loathe
Then love me, Rosalind.
To him will I : out of these convertites
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
And mine, to eke out hers.
So do all thoughts, they are winged.
Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her.
that she would have followed her exile, or have died
To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself
And turn'd into the extremity of love.
the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires, and
trial: wherein if I be foiled, there is but one
Exeunt
Treason is not inherited, my lord,
followers. Go you and prepare Aliena, for look
Never talk to me, I will weep.
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place.
but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much
I beseech you, punish me not with your hard
ripe, and that's the right virtue of the medlar.
Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will
Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE
no stronger than the word of a tapster, they are
no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no
Keep your word, Phebe, that you'll marry me,
And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch
What mar you then, sir?
thee, or in bastinado, or in steel, I will bandy
SCENE V. The Forest.
I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of
Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of.
Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
solemn talk.
Let me love him for that, and do you love him
Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
This carol they began that hour,
You say, that you'll have Phebe, if she will?
spirit, which you have not, a beard neglected,
Some lively touches of my daughter's favour.
boast of them. Come, warble, come.
SCENE I. The forest.
head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard?
I have been told so of many: but indeed an old
Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA
But at fourscore it is too late a week:
Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour
where it is.
mocked me before: but come your ways.
'So so' is good, very good, very excellent good, and
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry
Rowland de Boys, he was my father, and he is thrice
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Know'st now the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.
day he wrestled?
'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable,
[Aside]  A material fool!
And so had I, but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you
Thou art not so unkind
And I mine. I remember, when I was in love I broke
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
And mine, but it grows something stale with me.
you.
I thank you most for him.
out, they will spit, and for lovers lacking--God
too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard
Exeunt
Under an oak, whose boughs were moss'd with age
Faith, sir, so so.
A more sounder instance, come.
Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
Nay, I care not for their names, they owe me
For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.
Will I Rosalinda write,
The world esteem'd thy father honourable,
that all the beholders take his part with weeping.
How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock? and
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Gentleman,
SONG.
necessary. It is said, 'many a man knows no end of
Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well
Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me
meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
What, for a counter, would I do but good?
Jove, Jove! this shepherd's passion
A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to
Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in
I met the duke yesterday and had much question with
it is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I
comes not?
Enter ORLANDO and ADAM
Sweet Phebe, pity me.
Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.
Ay, sweet Rosalind.
My lord, he is but even now gone hence:
doth most mistake in her gifts to women.
knowledge?
with bitter words. Why look you so upon me?
You have my consent. Let your wedding be to-morrow:
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
For I can no where find him like a man.
I take some joy to say you are, because I would be
Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred
Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
But have I not cause to weep?
Full of wise saws and modern instances,
of thought, conceived of spleen and born of madness,
Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.
Nature's: Fortune reigns in gifts of the world,
of an If, as, 'If you said so, then I said so,' and
He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun
Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.
if you break one jot of your promise or come one
mightily grace himself on thee, he will practise
A scatter'd smile, and that I'll live upon.
Who with her head nimble in threats approach'd
Of nature's sale-work. 'Od's my little life,
They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in
But is there any else longs to see this broken music
Most truly limn'd and living in your face,
And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey
That will I, should I die the hour after.
And thy father bore it:
embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.
rejoice in yours.
Do, young sir, your reputation shall not therefore
That the main harvest reaps: loose now and then
No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot
By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found
goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? am I the man yet?
It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.
is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out
I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
All the pictures fairest lined
year, though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been
married of him than of another: for he is not like
Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of,
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favoured, for
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
been as proper?
And therefore put I on the countenance
Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook,
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
No? when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she
Enter CHARLES
Than to die well and not my master's debtor.
alone again, I'll never wrestle for prize more: and
Provided that you weed your better judgments
that oath, let me turn monster: therefore, my
But do not look for further recompense
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you
brother, gain nothing under him but growth, for the
unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.
No matter whither, so you come not here.
Which he, sir?
of holy bread.
Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is,
That little cares for buying any thing.
is called the Reproof Valiant. If again 'it was not
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under
Runs his erring pilgrimage,
But, for the seventh cause, how did you find the
But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a
Ay, I know who 'tis, he hath no interest in me in
in a thatched house!
Go with me to it and I'll show it you and by the way
Cleopatra's majesty,
And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good terms,
cannot part them.
Let him seek out Rosalind.
bachelor, and by how much defence is better than no
is in the fields, it pleaseth me well, but in
Had I before known this young man his son,
Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their
Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?
And I for no woman.
banished with her father?
the world, and to live in a nook merely monastic.
To tell this story, that you might excuse
Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
become me: my way is to conjure you, and I'll begin
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
physic your rankness, and yet give no thousand
There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news:
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
in the fountain, and I will do that when you are
Exeunt ORLANDO and ADAM
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one:
perform it.
If sight and shape be true,
which is politic, nor the lady's, which is nice, nor
withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops
Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together,
Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the
are sick. There is a man haunts the forest, that
hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man
But that the people praise her for her virtues
I'll make him find him: do this suddenly,
that hangs the verses on the trees, wherein Rosalind
What were his marks?
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
she answers thee with frowning looks, I'll sauce her
treacherous device and never leave thee till he
Ere he should thus have ventured.
her, being ever from their cradles bred together,
O dear Phebe,
Trow you who hath done this?
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
By my troth, thou sayest true, for since the little
at home, I was in a better place: but travellers
sighing every minute and groaning every hour would
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer:
I would kiss before I spoke.
Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly:
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy
Are you native of this place?
another as half-pence are, every one fault seeming
'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
here much Orlando!
whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke,
education: you have trained me like a peasant,
Alack, in me what strange effect
Besides, our hands are hard.
And with indented glides did slip away
For a taste:
High commendation, true applause and love,
My errand is to you, fair youth,
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
All the world's a stage,
My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
Herein I see thou lovest me not with the full weight
I have more cause.
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
'Good morrow, fool,' quoth I. 'No, sir,' quoth he,
That every eye which in this forest looks
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
So near our public court as twenty miles,
as your gesture cries it out, when your brother
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son
O my sweet master! O you memory
'Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?'
If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
When that the sleeping man should stir, for 'tis
That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,
From the east to western Ind,
with mine enemy, I have undone three tailors, I have
Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
Forbear, and eat no more.
Of old Sir Rowland! why, what make you here?
Rosalind: if I could meet that fancy-monger I would
Even by the squandering glances of the fool.
be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to see
This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you
No, by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you.
You are a thousand times a properer man
Let me have audience for a word or two:
O unhappy youth!
His leather skin and horns to wear.
My fortunes were more able to relieve her,
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown
A dance
God make incision in thee! thou art raw.
loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner
eyes! By so much the more shall I to-morrow be at
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
passion something and for no passion truly any
That love's keen arrows make.
I will content you, if what pleases you contents
Me believe it! you may as soon make her that you
Exeunt
may be chosen out of the gross band of the
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous,
betwixt us: I have as much of my father in me as
Enter ROSALIND for Ganymede, CELIA for Aliena, and TOUCHSTONE
father perforce, I will render thee again in
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore
with a medlar: then it will be the earliest fruit
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must
yet it is not, it is but so so. Art thou wise?
But is all this for your father?
Sure, it is hers.
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
I' faith, his hair is of a good colour.
carelessly, as they did in the golden world.
you are the first-born, but the same tradition
Fare you well: pray heaven I be deceived in you!
Can you remember any of the principal evils that he
Were both extermined.
What shall he have that kill'd the deer?
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
duke will drink under this tree. He hath been all
what straits of fortune she is driven, and it is
Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves
another trick, never come in my sight more.
to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or
must, for my own honour, if he come in: therefore,
Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.
But winter and rough weather.
Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT
make noise enough.
When last the young Orlando parted from you
With all graces wide-enlarged:
didst know how many fathom deep I am in love! But
female,--which in the common is woman, which
Was not Charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?
There is, sure, another flood toward, and these
acquainted with goldsmiths' wives, and conned them
strength of my youth.
As I do trust I am not--then, dear uncle,
Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
Exeunt
'Poor deer,' quoth he, 'thou makest a testament
EPILOGUE
misprised: but it shall not be so long, this
Limp'd in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
Heaven would in little show.
Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw
And in their barks my thoughts I'll character,
To OLIVER
mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.
He'll go along o'er the wide world with me,
give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have,
not in the lineaments of Nature.
After some question with him, was converted
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out,
knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of
Re-enter LE BEAU
In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!
Reads
offenders, and let Time try: adieu.
despite of a fall. But, turning these jests out of
No, fair princess, he is the general challenger: I
I would thou hadst been son to some man else:
fells, you know, are greasy.
you, and you shall be married to-morrow.
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth
of the forest and to couple us.
ROSALIND swoons
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.
Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.
I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.
Now Hercules be thy speed, young man!
worm-eaten nut.
He will have other means to cut you off.
the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of
contract of her marriage and the day it is
And, now I am remember'd, scorn'd at me:
Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
Give me your hand, Orlando. What do you say, sister?
And sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes
very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance, shepherd.
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
Orlando?
I'll do the service of a younger man
But fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth:
If ever,--as that ever may be near,--
And I'll sing it.
kind master.
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
so God keep your worship!
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
hope thou didst feign.
[Reads]
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
As wit and fortune will.
he feels no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean
Exeunt
Farewell, good Master Oliver: not,--
I' faith, coz, 'tis he.
There is much matter to be heard and learn'd.
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:
Here's a young maid with travel much oppress'd
Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER
Sir, it was I.
They say you are a melancholy fellow.
Out, fool!
He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?
By my life, I do, which I tender dearly, though I
I would thou hadst told me of another father.
his lover, as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse
last company: I am very glad to see you: even a
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
O, but she is wise.
Have with you. Fare you well.
the gods had made thee poetical.
called the Reply Churlish. If again 'it was not
What woman in the city do I name,
Send to his brother, fetch that gallant hither,
as his finger. And thou wert best look to't, for if
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles,
bound to him as I. Besides this nothing that he so
revenue: then your hose should be ungartered, your
natural for our whetstone, for always the dulness of
the reason why they are not so punished and cured
Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye:
Here shall he see
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
challenger's youth I would fain dissuade him, but he
more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more
Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck
Ay, go your ways, go your ways, I knew what you
Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such
With his mouth full of news.
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love:
Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
Enter OLIVER
Buckles in his sum of age,
whole sex withal.
worse at ease he is, and that he that wants money,
And thereby hangs a tale.' When I did hear
I am weary of you.
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?'
man's heart.
Something browner than Judas's marry, his kisses are
What fool is this?
Where learned you that oath, fool?
sir? You are very well met: God 'ild you for your
The more pity, that fools may not speak wisely what
Peace, I say. Good even to you, friend.
society,--which in the boorish is company,--of this
Am not I your Rosalind?
of heavy tedious penury, these Time ambles withal.
clown, thou perishest, or, to thy better
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:
For my sake be comfortable, hold death awhile at
I hope so.
thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours
tell me who it is.
there is such odds in the man. In pity of the
If thou remember'st not the slightest folly
As the winter to foul weather.
Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and
So please you, he is here at the door and importunes
Were you made the messenger?
heels and your heart both in an instant.
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
Who calls?
love no man in good earnest, nor no further in sport
I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you with a
Ay, of a snail, for though he comes slowly, he
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
because I do. Look, here comes the duke.
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadness.
Of me and all that I can make,
To be adopted heir to Frederick.
before you came, for look here what I found on a
I do desire we may be better strangers.
makes honest, and those that she makes honest she
A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh,
Between the constant red and mingled damask.
God save you, brother.
In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
I was too young that time to value her,
Shall we clap into't roundly, without hawking or
myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and
Why, how now, Adam! no greater heart in thee? Live
Wear this for me, one out of suits with fortune,
possible, on such a sudden, you should fall into so
As good cause as one would desire, therefore weep.
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,
More than your enemies.
Alas, he is too young! yet he looks successfully.
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat,
magician, most profound in his art and yet not
and altogether against my will.
that when thou art inclined to sleep.
I'll ask him what he would. Did you call, sir?
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness,
Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,
I pray you, tell it.
Let no fair be kept in mind
And we will nothing waste till you return.
That you insult, exult, and all at once,
That reason wonder may diminish,
their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he
Enter OLIVER
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
Exit
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee:
This handkercher was stain'd.
come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well said!
No, I warrant your grace, you shall not entreat him
Envenoms him that bears it!
'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to
thee to some shelter, and thou shalt not die for
thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover,
Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys.
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
His youngest son, and would not change that calling,
Hath banish'd me, his daughter?
matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand
of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are,
'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
I rather will subject me to the malice
And so am I for Phebe.
I am for other than for dancing measures.
O, what a world is this, when what is comely
I am so, I do love it better than laughing.
After my flight. Now go we in content
As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and
I will be bitter with him and passing short.
a fool to make me merry than experience to make me
Show me the place:
Do you think so?
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
shall see him.
give thee leave to die: but if thou diest before I
Exeunt
Upon a lie seven times removed:--bear your body more
I would have you.
servitude: I will no longer endure it, though yet I
Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying,
together is, abandon the society of this female, or,
Enter ORLANDO and ADAM, meeting
Into a bush: under which bush's shade
So please you, for I never heard it yet,
liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with
neither than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst
At seventeen years many their fortunes seek,
I will.
Thou hast not loved.
Welcome, young man,
Me, uncle?
to reason of such goddesses and hath sent this
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.
But doth he know that I am in this forest and in
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it
So be sure will Rosalind.
There comes an old man and his three sons,--
I pray you, do not fall in love with me,
But, for the bloody napkin?
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe
O, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily!
will either be food for it or bring it for food to
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
But upon the fairest boughs,
Exeunt
Counter-cheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie
Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.
can hardly remember.
And then he drew a dial from his poke,
Will you be married, motley?
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste
Sing it: 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
Sweet masters, be patient: for your father's
Which all this while had bled, and now he fainted
Than thine own gladness that thou art employ'd.
As till that time I shall not pity thee.
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
SCENE III. The forest.
I thank you for your company, but, good faith, I had
By doing deeds of hospitality:
The owner of the house I did inquire for?
They that reap must sheaf and bind,
Where will the old duke live?
O, yes, I heard them all, and more too, for some of
own peril on his forwardness.
With measure heap'd in joy, to the measures fall.
That will I, for I must bear answer back
If ever you have look'd on better days,
Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,
new-fangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires
Here's eight that must take hands
It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my
That here were well begun and well begot:
You shall try but one fall.
would open his lips when he put it into his mouth,
Nay, then, God be wi' you, an you talk in blank verse.
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire
Shall we go, coz?
She has a huswife's hand, but that's no matter:
Now counterfeit to swoon, why now fall down,
term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves.
A lean cheek, which you have not, a blue eye and
Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly?
are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.
Ay, and greater wonders than that.
have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never
desirous to lie with his mother earth?
Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,
Enter TOUCHSTONE
This is no place, this house is but a butchery:
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.
Yet thou liest in the bleak air: come, I will bear
damned for this, the devil himself will have no
have put themselves into voluntary exile with him,
I will not to wedding with thee.
I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
blessing, to breed me well: and there begins my
Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
minute behind your hour, I will think you the most
and so encounter.
and the rams together and to offer to get your
High wedlock then be honoured:
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
his wife, 'tis none of his own getting. Horns?
Whose heart the accustom'd sight of death makes hard,
Enter ORLANDO and ADAM
I am ambitious for a motley coat.
makes very ill-favouredly.
O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love
Enter two Pages
Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER, and CELIA
More, more, I prithee, more.
And never stays to greet him, 'Ay' quoth Jaques,
appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to
Time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of
Exeunt
Why then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?
Some, how brief the life of man
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.
Your mistress shall be happy.
your remedy.
time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
SCENE VI. The forest.
matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no
Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:
as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do: and
hath given us wit to flout at Fortune, hath not
The worst fault you have is to be in love.
christened.
How dost thou, Charles?
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head,
to marry me well, and not being well married, it
Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
You have a nimble wit: I think 'twas made of
speak no more of him, you'll be whipped for taxation
To glean the broken ears after the man
come to such penury?
Whether that thy youth and kind
differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses
met but they looked, no sooner looked but they
In spring time,  and c.
we two will rail against our mistress the world and
very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.
He cannot speak, my lord.
My tongue hath wrong'd him: if it do him right,
grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?
Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt
And so am I for no woman.
No, I protest, I know not the contents:
that the wrestling might not go forward.
beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in
itself courageous to petticoat: therefore courage,
Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
The matter's in my head and in my heart:
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
A motley fool, a miserable world!
Exit JAQUES
In bitterness. The common executioner,
'Tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her,
[To DUKE SENIOR]  To you I give myself, for I am yours.
all shall flout me out of my calling.
like to have: and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt
Just as high as my heart.
know no wise remedy how to avoid it.
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.
You should ask me what time o' day: there's no clock
obscuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like
enterprise. We pray you, for your own sake, to
Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.
that blind rascally boy that abuses every one's eyes
What sayest thou?
SCENE III. The forest.
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
That youth is surely in their company.
Or have a woman to your lord:
Prithee, who is't that thou meanest?
Yonder comes my master, your brother.
Exit ORLANDO
And one man in his time plays many parts,
Obscured in the circle of this forest.
Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me, do not, Phebe,
me his natural brother: therefore use thy
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or
Sermons in stones and good in every thing.
and would you yet I were merrier? Unless you could
Hymen from heaven brought her,
thou lookest cheerly, and I'll be with thee quickly.
for ladies.
Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or
SCENE IV. The forest.
sir, an ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own, a poor
run into, in that it is a thing of his own search
Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,
I'll prove a busy actor in their play.
world. Here comes two of the banished duke's pages.
Thus it goes:--
And after, every of this happy number
The flux of company:' anon a careless herd,
I'll have no husband, if you be not he:
Ay, and twenty such.
I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
though? C ourage! As horns are odious, they are
troth, we that have good wits have much to answer
brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my
I care not if I have: it is my study
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers
people, who best know him, that I am altogether
And all the embossed sores and headed evils,
for your love, I would be loath to foil him, as I
without any.
therefore tremble and depart.
If I sent him word again 'it was not well cut,' he
SCENE III. A room in the palace.
It pleases him to call you so, but he hath a
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.
The first, the Retort Courteous, the second, the
And after one hour more 'twill be eleven,
I will help you, if I can:
that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Didst thou hear these verses?
nor the courtier's, which is proud, nor the
humour and like enough to consent. What would you
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
SCENE II. The forest.
i' the country, for you'll be rotten ere you be half
Would they work in mild aspect!
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
And pity her for her good father's sake,
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
I have by hard adventure found mine own.
And you, fair sister.
After the shepherd that complain'd of love,
wooing, nor her sudden consenting, but say with me,
Who doth he gallop withal?
neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in
That fools should be so deep-contemplative,
I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings
So take her to thee, shepherd: fare you well.
Even he, madam.
The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,
If he for gold will give us any food:
There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.
How that a life was but a flower
be misprised: we will make it our suit to the duke
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard.
tempered as mine is to thee.
but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord
To Hymen, god of every town!
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
right butter-women's rank to market.
Is 'old dog' my reward? Most true, I have lost my
Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,
And he did render him the most unnatural
Alas, poor shepherd!
Some of my shame, if you will know of me
discretion, I had as lief thou didst break his neck
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege:
a many merry men with him, and there they live like
Leave me not behind thee: but,--
He that sweetest rose will find
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind,
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
all our misery.
sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may
You have said, but whether wisely or no, let the
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od's my will!
Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your
me see, what think you of falling in love?
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
Who doth ambition shun
You and you are sure together,
Which I have pass'd upon her, she is banish'd.
Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never sawest
By the stern brow and waspish action
Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
more was this knight swearing by his honour, for he
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
fellows and betray themselves to every modern
Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:
Some scar of it, lean but upon a rush,
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,
I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would
Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?
wrestler shall clear all: nothing remains but that
Therefore Heaven Nature charged
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
is to look into happiness through another man's
For well I know he was unnatural.
How parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see
Go hence a little and I shall conduct you,
head, nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?
Or I, I promise thee.
father charged you in his will to give me good
thing, as boys and women are for the most part
Atalanta's heels. Will you sit down with me? and
Is his complexion, and faster than his tongue
heart, that there shall not be one spot of love in't.
His very hair is of the dissembling colour.
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which
Call you this chiding?
By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now
me his countenance seems to take from me: he lets
If a hart do lack a hind,
The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.
SONG.
He is drowned in the brook: look but in, and you
What, boy!
And never stir assailants.
Enter ROSALIND and CELIA
Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that
shamed that was never gracious, if killed, but one
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
women the play may please. If I were a woman I
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
poor house, as your pearl in your foul oyster.
Mistress, you must come away to your father.
You have heard him swear downright he was.
there was not any man died in his own person,
speak not this that you should bear a good opinion
Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
seventh cause.
come but in, as others do, to try with him the
Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:
Ay, Celia, we stay'd her for your sake,
so the third. Yonder they lie, the poor old man,
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.
Unclaim'd of any man. But who comes here?
Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday
I would love you, if I could. To-morrow meet me all together.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor:
Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty,--
What stature is she of?
their father, making such pitiful dole over them
propositions of a lover, but take a taste of my
By my troth, yes, I count it but time lost to hear
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again.
Get you with him, you old dog.
Good morrow to your worship.
We are for you: sit i' the middle.
Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to
Then you must say 'I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.'
wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
I should have given him tears unto entreaties,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
married to-morrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe!
Food to the suck'd and hungry lioness?
Here shall he see No enemy
If it do come to pass
According to the measure of their states.
please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love
talking of her.
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
To SILVIUS
Bear him away. What is thy name, young man?
the revenue that was old Sir Rowland's will I
My father's love is enough to honour him: enough!
Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall
Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and
to come in disguised against me to try a fall.
Enter CELIA, with a writing
None could be so abused in sight as he.
SCENE III. The forest.
you no song, forester, for this purpose?
Look, he recovers.
My voice is ragged: I know I cannot please you.
him again? Answer me in one word.
feigning, and lovers are given to poetry, and what
married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to
SCENE III. Before OLIVER'S house.
Then but forbear your food a little while,
you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
and come every day to my cote and woo me.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
Why would you be so fond to overcome
Between the pale complexion of true love
best array: bid your friends, for if you will be
By and by.
It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed:
I say she never did invent this letter,
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
And I for Rosalind.
shall be married to-morrow:
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
say to me now, an I were your very very Rosalind?
Atalanta's better part,
Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies,
God ye good even, William.
So was I when your highness took his dukedom,
with you to your chapel?
And let not search and inquisition quail
Flourish. Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, ORLANDO, CHARLES, and Attendants
SCENE II. Lawn before the Duke's palace.
Yea, brought her hither,
What, you look merrily!
all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such
out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who
And well he might so do,
But till that time
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?
Thus do all traitors:
And give it food. There is an old poor man,
To the which place a poor sequester'd stag,
Enter LE BEAU
I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have
Exit
Orlando.
If with myself I hold intelligence
And they that are most galled with my folly,
I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's
But, sure, he's proud, and yet his pride becomes him:
have possessed her.
Or what is he of basest function
wear thy heart in a scarf!
escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him
What's that?
Not very well, but I have met him oft,
The other is daughter to the banish'd duke,
the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I shall
You to a long and well-deserved bed:
me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a
hence, and not a word, for here comes more company.
thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers.
I think he be transform'd into a beast,
The royal disposition of that beast
And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp
spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only
harm, and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes
I cannot live out of her company.
That can therein tax any private party?
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
To join in Hymen's bands,
Thy palm some moment keeps, but now mine eyes,
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY, JAQUES behind
private, it is a very vile life. Now, in respect it
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away,
forth such fruit.
That could do no vengeance to me.
the world I fill up a place, which may be better
had banished thy uncle, the duke my father, so thou
'Tis Hymen peoples every town,
Of what we think against thee.
How many actions most ridiculous
would prove: my friends told me as much, and I
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
solemnized: if the interim be but a se'nnight,
Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.
Have power to raise such love in mine,
A fool, a fool! I met a fool i' the forest,
the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as you have
Such a nut is Rosalind.
But the fair of Rosalind.
Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES
Know you where your are, sir?
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd,
her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.
Then sing him home,
Exit
living by the copulation of cattle, to be bawd to a
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time
And so am I for Phebe.
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother,
Says very wisely, 'It is ten o'clock:
By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.
he keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more
that I love thee. If my uncle, thy banished father,
am in love. I'll tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out
Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.
This I must do, or know not what to do:
by these presents.'
It is a pretty youth: not very pretty:
It was a lover and his lass,
this is called the Quip Modest. If again 'it was
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
As how I came into that desert place:--
When earthly things made even
Circumstance, the seventh, the Lie Direct. All
And yet it is not that I bear thee love,
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
In good set terms and yet a motley fool.
Like Turk to Christian: women's gentle brain
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
Brief, I recover'd him, bound up his wound,
To think my poverty is treacherous.
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
But winter and rough weather.
By heavenly synod was devised,
Must find love's prick and Rosalind.
Will you go?
Have their round haunches gored.
How thus we met, and these things finish.
When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know
yourself good and not to grace me. Believe then, if
If truth holds true contents.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
I would try, if I could cry 'hem' and have him.
make me honest.
But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies
Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
with you, you shall have some part of your will: I
No more but that I know the more one sickens the
You tell us the manner of the wrestling.
shepherds, I cannot see else how thou shouldst
When that I say the city-woman bears
''Tis right:' quoth he, 'thus misery doth part
kissing of her batlet and the cow's dugs that her
To have the touches dearest prized.
gentleman's saying.
and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind that
And she believes, wherever they are gone,
fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as
Exit
With all my heart, good youth.
loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.
were good pancakes and swore by his honour the
warn us!--matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
well cut,' he would answer, I spake not true: this
it, but he is resolute. I'll tell thee, Charles:
It cannot be: some villains of my court
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
And good even to you, sir.
love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to
speak. Sweet, say on.
I will not, till I please: you shall hear me. My
Well said: that was laid on with a trowel.
intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall
for I think you have no money in your purse.
world no injury, for in it I have nothing, only in
I will not touch a bit.
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
Did come to languish, and indeed, my lord,
I should not seek an absent argument
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
which you have not, but I pardon you for that, for
Gentle cousin,
duke to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:
a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a little.
And I for Ganymede.
Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
Why, thy godhead laid apart,
Thou hast not loved:
purgation. I have trod a measure, I have flattered
Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.
No jewel is like Rosalind.
That in this desert inaccessible,
Sport! of what colour?
remembrance, be at accord.
Salutation and greeting to you all!
bottom, like the bay of Portugal.
because his own are out, let him be judge how deep I
yesterday in despite of my invention.
with thee.
rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling, cousin?
should be hanged and carved upon these trees?
You and you are heart in heart
And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,
Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat, which I
Make an extent upon his house and lands:
SCENE V. Another part of the forest.
Will the faithful offer take
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze:
be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see
censure worse than drunkards.
SCENE I. A room in the palace.
mustard was naught: now I'll stand to it, the
Where dwell you, pretty youth?
the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.
inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles, for every
sing. Come, more, another stanzo: call you 'em stanzos?
For I am falser than vows made in wine:
Let me go, I say.
him heart-whole.
Should in their own confines with forked heads
motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The wise man's folly is anatomized
lips to open. You do love this maid?
capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.
neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with
So you may put a man in your belly.
must be content.
Enter AMIENS, JAQUES, and others
'Tis but a peevish boy, yet he talks well,
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other,
Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK, train, and LE BEAU
Her very silence and her patience
Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
Thou art thy father's daughter, there's enough.
it.
Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they
out of rings?
Atone together.
But what said Jaques?
Little knows this love in me:
Your features! Lord warrant us! what features!
Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when
Nay, but who is it?
Give me your hand. Art thou learned?
Who loves to lie with me,
That makes the world full of ill-favour'd children:
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
Did I offend your highness.
You, cousin
Thus we may see,' quoth he, 'how the world wags:
I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest
Good Monsieur Charles, what's the new news at the
Thou shalt have one.
Take thou no scorn to wear the horn,
the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show
Gross fools as he,
affection, by mine honour, I will, and when I break
he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may
More free from peril than the envious court?
me, and I will no longer endure it: therefore allow
Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are
O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself!
My father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart. Sir, you have well deserved:
gondola. Why, how now, Orlando! where have you been
And pleased with what he gets,
Is it a man?
the arm's end: I will here be with thee presently,
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.
Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
I do, sir.
If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
Should be call'd tyrants, butchers, murderers!
Wherein we play in.
then thy manners must be wicked, and wickedness is
perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar, the
Sad Lucretia's modesty.
God be wi' you: let's meet as little as we can.
condition of blood, you should so know me. The
Enter CELIA and ROSALIND
Which of the two was daughter of the duke
conqueror, and it would do well to set the deer's
And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
quotidian of love upon him.
How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go off a little.
Enter ROSALIND and CELIA
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you,
Melancholy.
SONG.
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
means and content is without three good friends,
Enter CORIN
them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of
What shall be our sport, then?
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
I will not eat my word, now thou art mine,
Thou diest for it.
you are my eldest brother, and, in the gentle
O brave Oliver,
But, cousin, what if we assay'd to steal
thither will I invite the duke and all's contented
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:
Wind away,
I'll bring you to him straight.
I am he that is so love-shaked: I pray you tell me
It is to be all made of faith and service,
never two ladies loved as they do.
Which is he that killed the deer?
He'll make a proper man: the best thing in him
For love is crowned with the prime
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
By my life, she will do as I do.
of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair
Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.
How prove you that, in the great heap of your
I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
There be some women, Silvius, had they mark'd him
mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman
Yes, I have gained my experience.
to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him
Your heart's desires be with you!
Committing me unto my brother's love,
It was your pleasure and your own remorse:
But I did find him still mine enemy:
That your poor friends must woo your company?
Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee,
And thrown into neglect the pompous court?
That shall civil sayings show:
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
And they are often tarred over with the surgery of
and broke three of his ribs, that there is little
I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck
God rest you merry, sir.
you, yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you,
Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.
Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next
A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.
Feed yourselves with questioning,
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
To seek a living in our territory.
Alas! dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.
And mark what object did present itself:
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
As yet, to question you about your fortunes.
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much
but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble
'Twas I, but 'tis not I	I do not shame
knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your
goose: but all's brave that youth mounts and folly
Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK and Lords
And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
ACT III
the old Robin Hood of England: they say many young
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to
will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies, see if
I must attend the duke at dinner: by two o'clock I
Not one to throw at a dog.
with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
Truly, thou art damned like an ill-roasted egg, all
Ay, but when?
Enter JAQUES DE BOYS
Well in her person I say I will not have you.
That I am wise. I must have liberty
I will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on
Because thou art not seen,
love-songs in their barks.
disposed to be merry, I will laugh like a hyen, and
your ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is
That the old carlot once was master of.
I see no more in you than in the ordinary
Rosalind of a better leer than you.
And willingly could waste my time in it.
But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
South-sea of discovery, I prithee, tell me who is it
philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
In all your business and necessities.
Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the gods
Unto the sweet bird's throat,
learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.
marries Aliena, shall you marry her: I know into
Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
want. Here comes Sir Oliver.
And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that
horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. Have
Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
That feelingly persuade me what I am.'
That's no matter: the feet might bear the verses.
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.
Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style.
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is
ACT II
them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.
I'll write it straight,
Of what kind should this cock come of?
An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.
suppers and sleeping-hours excepted: it is the
O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!
Nature presently distill'd
O that your highness knew my heart in this!
Look you, who comes here, a young man and an old in
of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously,
Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and JAQUES
It is my only suit,
The fair, the chaste and unexpressive she.
methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
There is none of my uncle's marks upon you: he
Exit
In their assign'd and native dwelling-place.
Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
Than she a woman: 'tis such fools as you
that tears do not become a man.
should down.
But were I not the better part made mercy,
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
That is the way to make her scorn you still.
Under an oak whose antique root peeps out
To DUKE SENIOR
ACT I
You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
your promise.
Then thou art damned.
Address'd a mighty power, which were on foot,
It is no boast, being ask'd, to say we are.
poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden
shake me up.
I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
give me the poor allottery my father left me by
Well, the beginning, that is dead and buried.
Of a snail?
divers persons. I'll tell you who Time ambles
To PHEBE
Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and
With observation, the which he vents
we be married.
The body of the country, city, court,
with thee in faction, I will o'errun thee with
Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither, but
be, I will marry thee, and to that end I have been
That ever love did make thee run into,
Stay, Jaques, stay.
strong a liking with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?
careless desolation, but you are no such man, you
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
That he misconstrues all that you have done.
Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were
From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports. Let
'Wit, whither wilt?'
Come, to our flock.
gentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that
affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid
I can live no longer by thinking.
Why, who cries out on pride,
meet, but mountains may be removed with earthquakes
Go with me: if you like upon report
'Was' is not 'is:' besides, the oath of a lover is
rail against all the first-born of Egypt.
The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
I do not know what 'poetical' is: is it honest in
'This is no flattery: these are counsellors
you shall tell me where in the forest you live.
teeth in your service. God be with my old master!
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
strength: if you saw yourself with your eyes or
Thou hast not, cousin,
Enter ORLANDO
A little riper and more lusty red
No, some of it is for my child's father. O, how
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold:
abuses our young plants with carving 'Rosalind' on
knows himself to be a fool.' The heathen
To ORLANDO
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors,
Seeking the food he eats
Do so: I'll not be by.
I might ask you for your commission, but I do take
If this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, I
'Tis just the fashion: wherefore do you look
No: let my father seek another heir.
That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands:
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
That thou mightst join her hand with his
I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave.
say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your
him, of as good as he, so he laughed and let me go.
But now I know her: if she be a traitor,
SCENE II. The forest.
But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?
Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and
No more, no more.
This is a man's invention and his hand.
For ever and a day.
O, yes, into a thousand similes.
he cannot study, and the other lives merrily because
He that brings this love to thee
will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a
'Tis I must make conclusion
Why, I have eat none yet.
Re-enter ORLANDO, with ADAM
Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,
I prithee, who?
This is a letter of your own device.
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
Pray thee, marry us.
Alas!
religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was
as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.
Do this expediently and turn him going.
And I'll sleep.
Why are you virtuous? why do people love you?
your brother how well I counterfeited. Heigh-ho!
have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from
Quip Modest, the third, the Reply Churlish, the
tongue for saying so: thou hast railed on thyself.
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.
kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.
A style for-challengers, why, she defies me,
Enter WILLIAM
prologues to a bad voice?
sunken, which you have not, an unquestionable
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Well, I'll end the song. Sirs, cover the while, the
testimony in your complexion that it was a passion
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
Who quickly fell before him: in which hurtling
All together here
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
Within these ten days if that thou be'st found
Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you.
From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother:
Very well: what would you?
Exit
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.
All the better, we shall be the more marketable.
Enter JAQUES
As benefits forgot:
Enter CORIN and TOUCHSTONE
Ha, what say'st thou, Silvius?
If their purgation did consist in words,
SCENE I. The Forest of Arden.
and, as thou sayest, charged my brother, on his
How now, daughter and cousin! are you crept hither
And all the men and women merely players:
softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.
Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.
The enemy of all your graces lives:
new court?
Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
Through all the world bears Rosalind.
The opening of his mouth, but suddenly,
Seek him with candle, bring him dead or living
good piece of flesh indeed! Learn of the wise, and
That you will feed on, but what is, come see.
The duke is humorous, what he is indeed,
True is it that we have seen better days,
good Aliena!
Or else by him my love deny,
what marriage is: this fellow will but join you
to-morrow, I'll give him his payment: if ever he go
good manners, if thou never sawest good manners,
pretty chopt hands had milked, and I remember the
I would not be thy executioner:
You amaze me, ladies: I would have told you of good
Whiles you chid me, I did love,
Virtue is no horn-maker, and my Rosalind is virtuous.
And out of you she sees herself more proper
yet to do, and here, where you are, they are coming
the lover's, which is all these: but it is a
'Tis he: slink by, and note him.
Exit
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
And fall into our rustic revelry.
Thy sting is not so sharp
To burn the lodging where you use to lie
I'll tarry no longer with you: farewell, good
Is much upon my fashion.
'Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens,
The bonny priser of the humorous duke?
think this was well counterfeited! I pray you, tell
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Know you before whom, sir?
Did you ever cure any so?
Yes, sir.
I do, truly, for thou swearest to me thou art
Yonder, sure, they are coming: let us now stay and see it.
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.
testament, with that I will go buy my fortunes.
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
him, then entertain him, then forswear him, now weep
By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend
Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not,
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed,
Or at every sentence end,
A thievish living on the common road?
answer in a catechism.
That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
It was a crest ere thou wast born:
Then learn this of me: to have, is to have, for it
Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
[Aside]  O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove
if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the
That says his bravery is not of my cost,
unfaithful: therefore beware my censure and keep
I prithee, who doth he trot withal?
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
gipsies on a horse.
Exeunt
courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.
stagger in this attempt, for here we have no temple
woo me: at which time would I, being but a moonish
Rosalind: so adieu.
They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
Marry, I prithee, do, to make sport withal: but
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
The parts and graces of the wrestler
Go with me, Silvius.
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
But, mistress, know yourself: down on your knees,
There were none principal, they were all like one
But, poor old man, thou prunest a rotten tree,
are rather point-device in your accoutrements as
Meaning me a beast.
the fool is the whetstone of the wits. How now,
day living. I speak but brotherly of him, but
madness, which was, to forswear the full stream of
No, truly.
SCENE II. A room in the palace.
O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.
of ambition, an envious emulator of every man's
shall be to your good, for my father's house and all
coming a-night to Jane Smile, and I remember the
Enter CELIA and ROSALIND
Frosty, but kindly: let me go with you,
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food?
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.
The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon
'Twixt the souls of friend and friend:
But if you do refuse to marry me,
It is to be all made of fantasy,
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
Of these most strange events:
As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.
'Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue.
Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with Lords
I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
You must, if you stay here, for here is the place
weeping tears 'Wear these for my sake.' We that are
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
As sure I think did never man love so--
before the priest, and certainly a woman's thought
And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
SCENE II. The forest.
So is the bargain.
I partly guess, for I have loved ere now.
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
That dost not bite so nigh
his destiny with him.
So holy and so perfect is my love,
Is there none here to give the woman?
And I for no woman.
That he hath not.
Although thy breath be rude.
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Such garments and such years: 'The boy is fair,
Who after me hath many a weary step
damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart
plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
'Tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce
such a foolish song. God be wi' you, and God mend
I do desire it with all my heart, and I hope it is
'The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man
And wheresoever we went, like Juno's swans,
Why then, my love adieu!
break my shins against it.
Most shallow man! thou worms-meat, in respect of a
to see the wrestling?
Young man, have you challenged Charles the wrestler?
Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food!
Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good
I have more cause to hate him than to love him:
I here importune death awhile, until
I am marble-constant, now the fleeting moon
Is often left unloved, we should have met you
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
I know thee now: how farest thou, soldier?
Let Rome be thus Inform'd.
Show me, my women, like a queen: go fetch
The varying shore o' the world. O Antony,
And does the meanest chares. It were for me
Bring him through the bands.
Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
He is unqualitied with very shame.
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
So,
Your Caesar's father oft,
It does, my lord.
Some nobler token I have kept apart
laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a cuckold! Good
With fervency drew up.
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke,
Noble friends,
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
The star is fall'n.
What was't to you?
Pays this for Marcus Crassus.
In Fulvia's death, how mine received shall be.
Our fortune on the sea is out of breath,
In nature's infinite book of secrecy
How now, worthy soldier?
Ah, let be, let be! thou art
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony,
Is he come back? Love, I am full of lead.
Which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life,
Which, if thou hast consider'd, let us know
Most absolute lord,
And look on their endeavour.
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,
But small to greater matters must give way.
Do not abuse my master's bounty by
Fulvia is dead.
To that destruction which I'll guard them from,
Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?
Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage,
There's Dolabella sent from Caesar, call him.
Ballad us out o' tune: the quick comedians
And target. Still he mends,
When I shall pray, 'O bless my lord and husband!'
but something given to lie, as a woman should not
Fulvia thy wife is dead.
A space for further travel.
Dead.
When did she send thee?
What poor an instrument
His power unto Octavia.
If it might please ye,--
Take thou no care, it shall be heeded.
Admired Octavia: great Mark Antony
So good as you have done.
Yourself shall go between 's: the mean time, lady,
Exit DERCETAS
To see't mine eyes are blasted.
By sea, by sea.
Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practise had
O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more:
Hast thou no care of me? shall I abide
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
This is my treasurer: let him speak, my lord,
Peace!
entreaty, and himself to the drink.
And celebrate our drink?
Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,
If it might please you, to enforce no further
Then let it do at once
Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder,
As to a lover's bed. Come, then, and, Eros,
Give him much wrong'd.
The world's great snare uncaught?
Manage this war.
Soldiers, have careful watch.
I would I had thy inches, thou shouldst know
May I never
Thy biddings have been done, and every hour,
Exeunt, those above bearing off MARK ANTONY's body
Whistling to the air, which, but for vacancy,
Let's speak To him.
Caesar's.
Most grossly, by his own!
The April 's in her eyes: it is love's spring,
I crave your highness' pardon.
Make her thanks bless thee.
Our letters are prepared.
Exit IRAS. A noise within
That sucks the nurse asleep?
The queen, my lord, the queen.
So, Dolabella,
Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed,
Grew fat with feasting there.
very epicure.
Commend unto his lips thy favouring hand:
The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,
Is valiant, and dejected, and, by starts,
may do homage: find me to marry me with Octavius
Go, Eros, send his treasure after, do it,
Who!
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
If I would say, 'Agrippa, be it so,'
To change a master. O, my fortunes have
Well said.
The pauses that he makes.
When she first met Mark Antony, she pursed up
Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.
My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
Whose better issue in the war, from Italy,
Truly, I have him: but I would not be the party
The business of this man looks out of him,
I am his fortune's vassal, and I send him
Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel
Is thine, if thou wilt ha't.
not worth the feeding.
You've strange serpents there.
Of it own colour too.
Where is he now?
Then Antony,--but now--Well, on.
Was never so emboss'd.
An honourable trial.
'Tis well thou'rt gone,
Become a dog that's mad: then is it sin
By your most gracious pardon,
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
A moiety of the world.
'Tis spoken well.
He needs must see himself.
With the arm'd rest, courtiers and beauteous freedom,
worm's an odd worm.
Here we: and if to-morrow
All is lost,
That quickens Nilus' slime, I go from hence
All that is won and lost: give me a kiss,
Being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
The time of universal peace is near:
The armourer of my heart: false, false, this, this.
My legions and my horse: six kings already
Exeunt
Come, your lord calls!
Enter Captains and Soldiers
Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
That have no use for trusting. If your master
He means in flesh.
Enter an Egyptian
You see how easily she may be surprised:
[Aside]  For this,
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
Royal wench!
Thou art sure to lose, and, of that natural luck,
Or, if you borrow one another's love for the
Should solder up the rift.
Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt,
May concern Caesar.
No, lady.
He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar's camp
For so he calls me: now I feed myself
Good morrow, general.
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?
If not denounced against us, why should not we
almost most absolute Alexas, where's the soothsayer
Is fully out.
Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most any thing Alexas,
Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
And his affairs come to me on the wind.
What, man?
Re-enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
I am not married, Caesar: let me hear
The honour is sacred which he talks on now,
There lock yourself, and send him word you are dead.
O Antony! O Antony!
The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
A leaner action rend us. What's amiss,
O excellent! I love long life better than figs.
Mock not, Enobarbus.
No more than my residing here at Rome
None about Caesar.
Have given myself the cause.
If, or for nothing or a little, I
And what they undid did.
Ever love Caesar so?
Lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts
Cleopatra!
Wishes were ever fools,--O, come, come, come,
Pardon, pardon!
That make their looks by his, he was not merry,
But pay me terms of honour, cold and sickly
Out-go my thinking on you.
Is Caesar's homager: else so thy cheek pays shame
does stand,
This amorous surfeiter would have donn'd his helm
Ourselves alone. I'll write it: follow me.
Come hither, sir.
Exit Attendant
To lay his gay comparisons apart,
Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of
To suffer all alike. That he should dream,
Shall pass on thy approof. Most noble Antony,
The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm
Both as the same, or rather ours the elder,
Till we perceived, both how you were wrong led,
The man is innocent.
Which will become you both, farewell.
Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
SCENE XI. Another part of the same.
Why have you stol'n upon us thus! You come not
But what indeed is honest to be done:
To be ungentle.
The heart of brothers govern in our loves
He will to his Egyptian dish again: then shall the
Whispers CHARMIAN
Make your best use of this: I have perform'd
From firm security.
On blossoming Caesar, and this pine is bark'd,
Exit
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS
How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
The quality of her passion shall require,
That first we come to words, and therefore have we
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
Madam,
Free, madam! no, I made no such report:
that
I will oppose his fate. Our force by land
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the
And full of purpose.
As his strong sides can volley.
I warrant you, madam.
Dream of impediment! Let me have thy hand:
To hold you in perpetual amity,
Sir, you and I must part, but that's not it:
Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?
The horse were merely lost, the mares would bear
We will here part.
But, since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
The opposite of itself: she's good, being gone,
Away, my Thetis!
Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
So mightily betray'd! yet at the first
This was his basket.
As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount
Approach, there! Ah, you kite! Now, gods
For when I am revenged upon my charm,
And thou art honest too.
Make thee a fortune from me.
You think of him too much.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  What means this?
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
Well, go to, I will,
Caesar, I bring thee word,
My purposes do draw me much about:
O, he has given example for our flight,
Of all thy sex, most monster-like, be shown
Exit
gods great harm in their women, for in every ten
Ah, stand by.
What is his strength by land?
Not Caesar's valour hath o'erthrown Antony,
With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
Good Enobarbus!
Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,
Lack blood to think on't, and flush youth revolt:
His nobleness well acted, which your death
And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little,--
If thereon you rely. I'll take my leave.
What should I do, I do not?
And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts,
Enter EROS with armour
The which you both denied.
Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
Mine, and most of our fortunes, to-night, shall
She hales him up and down
When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.
They'll grind the one the other. Where's Antony?
If they had swallow'd poison, 'twould appear
The power of Caesar, and
Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
Shall make it live again. Woo't thou fight well?
do, but in the way of honesty: how she died of the
No wars without doors: Caesar gets money where
that? away!
But, fearing since how it might work, hath sent
Though you in swearing shake the throned gods,
I, where would you choose it?
Most certain. Sister, welcome: pray you,
Beyond the mark of thought: and the high gods,
I have said.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MECAENAS, and AGRIPPA
The meered question: 'twas a shame no less
Did practise on my state, your being in Egypt
I have follow'd thee to this, but we do lance
He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea,
Caesar and Antony shall well greet together:
My nightingale,
Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
Our will is Antony be took alive,
this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns
To try a larger fortune.
The element they lived in: in his livery
Undo that prayer, by crying out as loud,
Our worser thoughts heavens mend! Alexas,--come,
He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her
what is't?
Now hazarded to thy grace.
My music playing far off, I will betray
I have done enough, a lower place, note well,
Many times, madam.
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
Taken as seen, for Pompey's name strikes more
Soundly, my lord.
On all that need: let me report to him
Did hang a salt-fish on his hook, which he
Out of our question wipe him.
You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,
As they pinch one another by the disposition, he
Prithee, peace.
Speak that which is not.
Against the flint and hardness of my fault:
Do as I bid you. Where's this cup I call'd for?
Last night you did desire it: speak not to us.
Under the earth.
Nay, then I'll run.
That ever I should call thee castaway!
With the green sickness.
From Antony win Cleopatra: promise,
Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends--
Go to the fellow, good Alexas, bid him
Life perfect honour.
Straight, how 'tis like to go.
Beneath the visiting moon.
Hold, worthy lady, hold:
What, of death too,
Did show ourselves i' the field, and to that end
When it concerns the fool or coward. On:
You do extend
Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
Most noble empress, you have heard of me?
What's your highness' pleasure?
That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together,
Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o' the moon,
Enter CLEOPATRA
these signs,
and moves with its own organs: it lives by that
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
Exeunt
And forced to drink their vapour.
SCENE X. Another part of the plain.
Turn from me, then, that noble countenance,
How I convey my shame out of thine eyes
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt,--
It signs well, does it not?
Go with me to my tent, where you shall see
cries out 'No more,' reconciles them to his
All which time
Worthy many babes and beggars!
And say'st it is not fit.
What, was he sad or merry?
You praise yourself
And show me to the shouting varletry
That long time have been barren.
Nor curstness grow to the matter.
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure,
Let him for ever go:--let him not--Charmian,
It wounds thine honour that I speak it now--
The water which they beat to follow faster,
All take hands.
Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
Your loss is as yourself, great, and you bear it
To-morrow, Caesar,
Chiefly i' the world, more laugh'd at, that I should
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Will fight with him by sea.
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.
My being in Egypt, Caesar,
Bocchus, the king of Libya, Archelaus,
To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit
You lie, up to the hearing of the gods.
O!
O madam, madam, madam!
Enter the city, clip your wives, your friends,
The prescript of this scroll: our fortune lies
But comforts we despise, our size of sorrow,
Enter an Attendant
But here comes Antony.
O, sir, pardon me!
SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
O, is't come to this?
In Cleopatra's sails their nests: the augurers
There would he anchor his aspect and die
Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
I yield thee up my life.
Not what he knew I was: he makes me angry,
Will have it thus, my master and my lord
Experience, manhood, honour, ne'er before
Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort,
That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
His fretted fortunes give him hope, and fear,
Who's his lieutenant, hear you?
How much we do o'er-count thee.
Know you him?
To take this offer: but Mark Antony
That Lepidus of the triumvirate
For being yare about him.
A heavy sight!
Or I have no observance.
You have been a boggler ever:
Here's more news.
'Tis done already, and the messenger gone.
[Aside]  Mine honesty and I begin to square.
He lessens his requests, and to thee sues
I'll raise the preparation of a war
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle,--
That I will joy no more.
Is he gone?
That only have fear'd Caesar: to the ports
To taunt at slackness. Canidius, we
This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
Arise, you shall not kneel:
Or being, concern you not.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music:
If you apply yourself to our intents,
In thy fats our cares be drown'd,
Than that which is to approach.
I'll play the penitent to you: but mine honesty
So far ask pardon as befits mine honour
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
'Tis so. And the tears of it are wet.
Sir?
Let him appear.
Whose love is never link'd to the deserver
Both what by sea and land I can be able
[Aside to MENAS]  Forbear me till anon.
[Aside to POMPEY]  If for the sake of merit thou
With thy grapes our hairs be crown'd:
The rack dislimns, and makes it indistinct,
Caesar and Lepidus
My lord desires you presently: my news
his fortune, his fortune! O, let him marry a woman
Heart, once be stronger than thy continent,
Now, Eros.
And he hath sent for thee: for the queen,
Not what you have reserved, nor what acknowledged,
Exeunt
Of youth upon him, from which the world should note
he married but his occasion here.
Help me away, dear Charmian, I shall fall:
Rich in his father's honour, creeps apace,
SCENE VI. Near Misenum.
O, quietness, lady!
Alas, and woe!
Let's see how it will give off.
darkling stand
Be jolly, lords.
Tempt him not so too far, I wish, forbear:
See, Caesar! O, behold,
News, my good lord, from Rome.
As things but done by chance.
Exeunt MARK ANTONY and EUPHRONIUS
Most meet
Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate
Here PROCULEIUS and two of the Guard ascend the  monument by a ladder placed against a window, and,  having descended, come behind CLEOPATRA. Some of the Guard unbar and open the gates
What, are the brothers parted?
And have my learning from some true reports,
Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.
O sir, you are too sure an augurer,
For both, my lord.
Have lipp'd, and trembled kissing.
Traduced for levity, and 'tis said in Rome
I should have found it afterwards well done,
As this I dream'd of?
[Aside]               You will be whipp'd.
Not as you served the cause, but as 't had been
But stirr'd by Cleopatra.
To MARK ANTONY
Or look on thine, we could not stall together
Tend me to-night,
How now! do you hear this?
cuckold, they would make themselves whores, but
I robb'd his wound of it, behold it stain'd
You shall hear from me still, the time shall not
I shall remain your debtor.
Chain mine arm'd neck, leap thou, attire and all,
Burn'd on the water: the poop was beaten gold,
Well, sir, good night.
Hipparchus, my enfranched bondman, whom
With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a
Well I know the man.
Welcome, dear madam.
cannot be denied what I have done by land.
She hath betray'd me and shall die the death.
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevail'd
But when you are well pleased.
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies'
I would not see't.
And say 'Ah, ha! you're caught.'
Publicola, and Caelius, are for sea:
Exeunt
Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
The rather, for I earnestly beseech,
As you shall give the advice. By the fire
I know not, Menas,
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.
Dolabella!
Have buried them for prey!
And suffer'd my command.
The kings of Mede and Lycaonia,
I see it in
Their ships are yare, yours, heavy: no disgrace
My idleness doth hatch. How now! Enobarbus!
The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.
The queen shall then have courtesy, so she
Where think'st thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
High order in this great solemnity.
This is most certain that I shall deliver:
Gives a letter
decorum, and fortune him accordingly!
Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now
That Antony may seem to spend his fury
By the height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth
SCENE XIII. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
Enter DERCETAS, with the sword of MARK ANTONY
That so she died, for her physician tells me
Caesar, and companion me with my mistress.
Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death,
Have nick'd his captainship, at such a point,
Be choked with such another emphasis!
The garboils she awaked, at the last, best:
Whom these things cannot blemish,--yet must Antony
But 'tis no matter, thou shalt bring him to me
His baseness that ensued?
And gives his potent regiment to a trull,
Sir, the queen.
You have been nobly borne. From me awhile.
Ourselves to end ourselves.
Say I am dancing, if in mirth, report
But resolution, and the briefest end.
Though you be therein curious, the least cause
Welcome, lady.
Guard her till Caesar come.
Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
Will Caesar speak?
Thou art a soldier only: speak no more.
I'll set thee in a shower of gold, and hail
It's monstrous labour, when I wash my brain,
Exeunt MARK ANTONY, QUEEN CLEOPATRA, and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
The petty difference, we yet not know.
What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.
With most delicious poison. Think on me,
Octavia to his wife, whose beauty claims
That, being unseminar'd, thy freer thoughts
Choose your own company, and command what cost
The gods make this a happy day to Antony!
Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
As she would catch another Antony
So the gods preserve thee!
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
Exit
Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it:
If you'll employ me to him.
Caesar, having made use of him in the wars 'gainst
And that she has discharged: what thou wouldst do
But bid farewell, and go: when you sued staying,
None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.
Not I.
Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may say,
If fortune be not ours to-day, it is
What are you?
Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy
Let me shake thy hand,
Note him good Charmian, 'tis the man, but note him:
I will praise any man that will praise me, though it
We have beat him to his camp: run one before,
Caesar hath hang'd him. Canidius and the rest
And feel I am so most. O Antony,
Enter a Soldier of CAESAR's
well for her.
Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once
I tell you true: best you safed the bringer
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar:
The article of your oath, which you shall never
SCENE I. Alexandria. A room in CLEOPATRA's palace.
Through the ashes of my chance: wert thou a man,
What's thy name?
Pompey the Great and all his dignities
Exeunt
For that he dares us to't.
There's hope in't yet.
The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper,
And not have spoke on't! In me 'tis villany,
Look him i' the face.
He stays upon your will.
Let him appear that's come from Antony.
We shall,
Ha, my brave emperor!
I am full sorry
My dear master,
He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden
No more, but e'en a woman, and commanded
Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the
The thing we sue for.
Hush!
Whose he is we are, and that is, Caesar's.
In solemn show attend this funeral,
Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
Beneath the fall I have.
Nay, then.
Three in Egypt
Since Cleopatra died,
Her infinite variety: other women cloy
Blow me into abhorring! rather make
Exit
To stoop in such a case.
Show me the way of yielding.
Enter CANIDIUS
To drench the Capitol, but that they would
Please you, retire to your chamber.
I learn'd of thee. How! not dead? not dead?
One ever near thee: call for Enobarbus,
Enter CLEOPATRA and her maids aloft, with CHARMIAN and IRAS
With brazen din blast you the city's ear,
That makes the weight: had I great Juno's power,
Eros!--I come, my queen:--Eros!--Stay for me:
Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
made the night light with drinking.
Which shackles accidents and bolts up change,
'Tis easy to't, and there I will attend
Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end,--
Mine honour, it. Repent that e'er thy tongue
To SCARUS
Make me revenger. Bear the king's son's body
Strike not by land, keep whole: provoke not battle,
Are therefore to be pitied.
So, so, come, give me that: this way, well said.
Till I shall see you in your soldier's dress,
Re-enter DOLABELLA
Our overplus of shipping will we burn,
My hearty friends,
Wherefore my father should revengers want,
So sought'st to hinder.
No further, sir.
I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed:
On more mechanic compliment, I'll leave thee
And plighter of high hearts! O, that I were
The loyalty well held to fools does make
But 'twould offend him, and in his offence
Which had superfluous kings for messengers
Madam, he will, I know't.
Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof
might take two thieves kissing.
Is done unto thy hand: the last she spake
And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
Carries beyond belief.
That time,--O times!--
When vantage like a pair of twins appear'd,
Once for thy spritely comfort, and ten-fold
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
Nor make replies of loathness: take the hint
The hand of death hath raught him.
Shall outstrike thought: but thought will do't, I feel.
The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip:
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars,
A master-leaver and a fugitive:
The weight we must convey with's will permit,
There's a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.
To camp this host, we all would sup together,
SCENE I. Before Alexandria. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp.
And may, through all the world: 'tis yours, and we,
Setting down his basket
With an augmented greeting.
I'll wrestle with you in my strength of love:
And earns a place i' the story.
Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard,
An Antony, that I might do you service
On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony,
Exeunt
Go to, go to.
Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide,
Saw you my lord?
Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death
They have dispatch'd with Pompey, he is gone,
as it hath breadth: it is just so high as it is,
Soldier, thou art: but his whole action grows
By any desperate change: my more particular,
And shortly comes to harvest.
I do not greatly care to be deceived,
Alarum. Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
I said before, that which is the strength of their
The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides!
Enter Soothsayer
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
By the discandying of this pelleted storm,
Being prepared for land.
Wast beaten from Modena, where thou slew'st
Let's not confound the time with conference harsh:
Does pay thy labour richly, go.
I will not hurt him.
Naught, naught all, naught! I can behold no longer:
Fall not a tear, I say, one of them rates
Find cause in Caesar.
And ever welcome to us.
Yet, coming from him, that great medicine hath
Will give thee all the world.
Makes his approaches to the port of Rome:
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
And all the gods go with you! upon your sword
Draw lots who shall begin.
For such a petty war: his soldiership
Caesar, I shall.
Till that the conquering wine hath steep'd our sense
Exeunt
Proculeius,
She do defeat us, for her life in Rome
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.
Come.
When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!
Noble Antony,
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm,
Was borne so like a soldier, that thy cheek
Burn the great sphere thou movest in!
What's your pleasure, sir?
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels,
Nay, hear them, Antony:
And did deserve his change: for what I have conquer'd,
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me:
You wager'd on your angling, when your diver
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
Of Cneius Pompey's, besides what hotter hours,
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.
Than was his loss, to course your flying flags,
Splitted the heart. This is his sword,
And drink carouses to the next day's fate,
As when mine empire was your fellow too,
And with your speediest bring us what she says,
Let's mock the midnight bell.
Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady,
her, she hath such a celerity in dying.
To none but thee, no more, but when to thee.
Though he be honourable,--
To make itself, in thee, fair and admired!
And you by land.
Alarum. Drums and trumpets. Enter AGRIPPA and others
His vacancy with his voluptuousness,
Quicken with kissing: had my lips that power,
Were well deserved of rashness.
Discredit my authority with yours,
But conquer'd merely.
One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
Nor any one.
Let us score their backs,
Till they had stol'n our jewel. All's but naught,
Might have prevented many. Eros, ho!
Because we brave her: come.
Deny us for our good, so find we profit
Hast thou drunk well?
A sennet sounded. Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK  ANTONY, LEPIDUS, POMPEY, AGRIPPA, MECAENAS, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, MENAS, with other captains
They have put forth the haven
The business she hath broached in the state
To let him breathe between the heavens and earth,
Most sweet queen,--
Re-enter MARK ANTONY and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
I saw the treasons planted.
Who would not have his wife so?
The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
Exit GALLUS
Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is
Take to you no hard thoughts:
Would I had never seen her.
That day appear'd, and oft before gave audience,
Sir, this should be answer'd.
And poison it in the source, and the first stone
A shrewd one to's.
Thou shouldst come like a Fury crown'd with snakes,
My country's high pyramides my gibbet,
Quick, quick, good hands.
This orient pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.
Alarum. Enter MARK ANTONY, in a march, SCARUS, with others
Rare Egyptian!
And by a gem of women, to be abused
And serving you so long!
In every power that moves.
Do! why: what else?
For what his eyes eat only.
That kneel'd unto the buds. Admit him, sir.
Her people out upon her, and Antony,
Exit
To vie strange forms with fancy, yet, to imagine
No less in pity than his glory which
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
Then belike my children shall have no names:
He says so.
Remains in use with you. Our Italy
We, ignorant of ourselves,
So differing in their acts. Yet if I knew
It beggar'd all description: she did lie
Exit
which nourisheth it, and the elements once out of
'Tis a brave army,
To burn this night with torches: know, my hearts,
Then was the time for words: no going then,
Thou hast been whipp'd for following him: henceforth
No worse a husband than the best of men,
Shall have the fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
Enter DOLABELLA
out, there are members to make new. If there were
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
Gracious madam,
Importeth thee to know, this bears.
So great weight in his lightness. If he fill'd
Nay, hear him.
Fill till the cup be hid.
For I have gain'd by 't.
Follow me close, I'll bring you to't. Adieu.
The fancy outwork nature: on each side her
SCENE XIV. The same. Another room.
Take from his heart, take from his brain,
The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
Will this description satisfy him?
Your will?
I am sick and sullen.
There is a change upon you.
If from the field I shall return once more
When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
Betwixt us as the cement of our love,
Unpolicied!
He shall have every day a several greeting,
Your ships are not well mann'd,
Which sleeps, and never palates more the dug,
Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.
In Sicyon:
Say to great Caesar this: in deputation
Of which I do accuse myself so sorely,
Which soon he granted,
Friend and companion in the front of war,
Re-enter Guardsman, with Clown bringing in a basket
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
I must be laugh'd at,
For poor'st diminutives, for doits, and let
What man is this?
Stand close, and list him.
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams,
[Aside]  'Tis better playing with a lion's whelp
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.
Exit ALEXAS
Let his shames quickly
Go charge Agrippa
[To OCTAVIUS CAESAR]  Thus do they, sir: they take
And drown consideration.
Which might have well becomed the best of men,
Now, my lord.
Shall bear the olive freely.
And kings have been your fellows.
Pray ye, sir?
I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian:
That's our offer.
Will yield us up.
There's gold for thee.
That do afflict each other!
Thou fumblest, Eros, and my queen's a squire
Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
Lord of lords!
They heave MARK ANTONY aloft to CLEOPATRA
Within  'A way there, a way for Caesar!'
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Making and marring fortunes. You did know
Peace! what noise?
O noble weakness!
There, Diomed there.
And well am like to do, for, I perceive,
Madam!
To come thus was I not constrain'd, but did
That life, a very rebel to my will,
Do draw the inward quality after them,
Lie graveless, till the flies and gnats of Nile
If e'er thou look'dst on majesty.
My better service, when my turpitude
There is my hand.
A sun and moon, which kept their course,
Seek him, and bring him hither.
The gods forbid!
How pomp is follow'd! mine will now be yours,
A halter'd neck which does the hangman thank
Look out o' the other side your monument,
Exeunt
Is it so, sir?
I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.
No.
Rarely, rarely:
Which I do owe you.
Hie you to Egypt again.
Why will my lord do so?
Affairs of Antony, there did persuade
Hear me, good madam.
Ho! hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards,
The good precedence, fie upon 'But yet'!
O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece
Murder in healing wounds: then, noble partners,
Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy
I'll leave you, lady.
To CLEOPATRA
[Aside]  Well, I could reply:
Let Antony look over Caesar's head
How now, masters!
I pray you, rise, rise, Egypt.
When one so great begins to rage, he's hunted
Bid her have good heart:
Why, then, we kill all our women:
I'll tell you in your ear.
Thus would I wear them out.
Exeunt
And so proceed accordingly.
To bring bad news: give to a gracious message.
The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
She's a most triumphant lady, if report be square to
Where is the queen?
Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe:
his discretion.
We have jaded out o' the field.
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
Caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster:
Peace, peace!
Exit
There is a vent of blood and something blown:
That overtopp'd them all. Betray'd I am:
I have heard it, Pompey,
To the way she's forced to.
Art turn'd the greatest liar.
I knew it for my bond.
Drive him to Rome: 'tis time we twain
His sons he there proclaim'd the kings of kings:
Wouldst thou be window'd in great Rome and see
Were we before our armies, and to fight.
To bear such idleness so near the heart
Assist, good friends.
He hath whipp'd with rods, dares me to personal combat,
You must not stay here longer, your dismission
That I might sleep out this great gap of time
Crested the world: his voice was propertied
pyramises are very goodly things, without
Work without it. Truth is, that Fulvia,
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  That year, indeed, he was
To beat me out of Egypt, my messenger
'O, bless my brother!' Husband win, win brother,
Gallus, go you along.
And shall, sir, give's your hand.
As I have said you did.
I will reward thee
The good gods me presently,
I shall be furnish'd to inform you rightly
But when we in our viciousness grow hard--
Through whom I might command it? Come thou near.
To lay on me a cruelty, by taking
I dread, too late.
Are in the field: a mighty strength they carry.
Faints
To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood,
Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed, and sleep:
do his kind.
I have myself resolved upon a course
Enter MARK ANTONY and OCTAVIA
Which is the Queen of Egypt?
be--drunk to bed.
Go put it to the haste.
That what they do delay, they not deny.
There she appeared indeed, or my reporter devised
But, pray you, stir no embers up. Here comes
We please them not by land.
Not like a formal man.
If beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle
We'll know all our fortunes.
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
amity shall prove the immediate author of their
Your fortunes are alike.
That magical word of war, we have effected,
Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
It shall content me best: be gentle to her.
You wrong this presence, therefore speak no more.
Welcome from Egypt, sir.
To him again: tell him he wears the rose
Perchance! nay, and most like:
By one that looks on feeders?
Your mariners are muleters, reapers, people
Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
O well-divided disposition! Note him,
That will I, Pompey.
The beds i' the east are soft, and thanks to you,
Good night.
The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me,
This case of that huge spirit now is cold:
thee, captain,
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.
Since I saw you last,
He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap,
And neither way inclines.
I had rather seal my lips, than, to my peril,
Exit ALEXAS
A pair so famous. High events as these
No,
Unto an enemy's triumph.
to wars with the women!
On our side like the token'd pestilence,
Exit MARDIAN
Thus then, thou most renown'd: Caesar entreats,
Her hair, what colour?
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, GALLUS, PROCULEIUS, MECAENAS, SELEUCUS, and others of his Train
What is't you say?
I cannot hate thee worser than I do,
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Hear the ambassadors.
And do invite you to my sister's view,
Shall never find it more.
For they have entertained cause enough
Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
Here, madam.
For thy good valour. Come thee on.
We came hither to fight with you.
Have used to conquer, standing on the earth,
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
I am dying, Egypt, dying, only
Let's ha't, good soldier.
Under his chance: if we draw lots, he speeds,
Nay, pray you, sir,--
Hoists sails and flies.
The gods best know,--
Lepidus, let him speak:
follow worse, till the worst of all follow him
Thou, an Egyptian puppet, shalt be shown
To say as I said then! But, come, away,
Exeunt
'Twill be naught:
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.
He dreams: I know they are in Rome together,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory
What says the married woman? You may go:
And, when we are put off, fall to their throats:
them and a great cause, they should be esteemed
All little jealousies, which now seem great,
Hail, Caesar, and my lord! hail, most dear Caesar!
Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
And, though thou think me poor, I am the man
I hope well of to-morrow, and will lead you
He comes too short of that great property
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  Will Caesar weep?
Of Sicily, Sardinia, and I must
I will not stay behind.
What, Octavia?
Enter MARK ANTONY and EROS
The ne'er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia
Before did satisfy you. If you'll patch a quarrel,
Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
Strikes him down
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, and his Army
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
Caesar and Antony have ever won
Cup us, till the world go round!
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st:
Why should he not?
Ay, ay, farewell.
pity to cast them away for nothing, though, between
From Silvius, sir.
My duty on your hand.
A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly
Enter LEPIDUS, MECAENAS, and AGRIPPA
It is well done, and fitting for a princess
That noises it against us.
Fie, wrangling queen!
Thou'rt an honest man.
'Tis sport to maul a runner.
A diminution in our captain's brain
When rioting in Alexandria, you
Re-enter MARK ANTONY
To let me be partaker.
Which, as I take't, we shall, for his best force
Will leap to be his friend: for us, you know,
He is twenty men to one.
Be there in person?
Say thou, shall call her mistress.' So he nodded,
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?
What it is worth embraced.
But accidents unpurposed. Draw, and come.
And give you to the gods.
Exeunt all but DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help,
Nay, I'll help too.
Dolabella!
Take no offence that I would not offend you:
Which my despair proclaims, let that be left
Flourish. Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK ANTONY, and LEPIDUS
And bring me how he takes my death.
Being so frustrate, tell him he mocks
Let me request you off: our graver business
Spoke scantly of me: when perforce he could not
Whip him. Were't twenty of the greatest tributaries
Horrible villain! or I'll spurn thine eyes
Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded
Help me, my women! O, he is more mad
Say that I wish he never find more cause
I'll not sleep neither: this mortal house I'll ruin,
Frighted each other? why should he follow?
You take me in too dolorous a sense,
Welcome, my good Alexas. Did I, Charmian,
Strike those that make them, and their story is
Is come into the field.
Yet they are not join'd: where yond pine
'Tis your noblest course.
Exit
Till which encounter,
Didst hear her speak? is she shrill-tongued or low?
But there's no goodness in thy face: if Antony
But why, why, why?
Antony call, I see him rouse himself
Not as deserved.
As you did love, but as you fear'd him.
Ay, dread queen.
Fortune pursue thee!
As if a god, in hate of mankind, had
No less beg than a kingdom: if he please
Enter OCTAVIA with her train
Eros, thou yet behold'st me?
How honourable and how kindly we
You'll heat my blood: no more.
This is stiff news--hath, with his Parthian force,
I will tell you.
The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.
Ah, women, women! come, we have no friend
O Cleopatra! thou art taken, queen:
Cut my lace, Charmian, come,
What should I stay--
He fell upon me ere admitted: then
Becomes his captain's captain: and ambition,
Which has no need of you, be gone:
never recover.
There's a strong fellow, Menas.
To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter,
And at this time most easy 'tis to do't,
Enjoy thy plainness,
Alarums. Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS wounded
Shall all be done by the rule. Good night, dear lady.
As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me,
What Venus did with Mars.
Be noble to myself: but, hark thee, Charmian.
A most unnoble swerving.
When half to half the world opposed, he being
Was he not here?
For idleness itself.
At your noble pleasure.
To take me to thee, as I was to him
In their best fortunes strong, but want will perjure
That which none else can utter. By this marriage,
That has this morning left thee, would have still
Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
To front this present time.
The business we have talk'd of.
And worthy shameful cheque it were, to stand
Speak to me home, mince not the general tongue:
Re-enter IRAS with a robe, crown,  and c
Sentinels at their post
Caesar, I shall.
When he shines by: I say again, thy spirit
The valiant Caesar!
We purpose her no shame: give her what comforts
'Good friend,' quoth he,
She's dead, my queen:
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
Lives he?
His cocks do win the battle still of mine,
Rich pearls upon thee.
If we compose well here, to Parthia:
SCENE XII. Another part of the same.
Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful
An argument that he is pluck'd, when hither
Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
Speak, Agrippa.
To this great fairy I'll commend thy acts,
Your reconciler! Wars 'twixt you twain would be
As that which makes it.
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
A Roman thought hath struck him. Enobarbus!
I must with haste from hence.
Wrinkles forbid!
To run and show their shoulders. Friends, be gone,
Beguiled all spies.
Hark, Ventidius.
Indeed!
Who's gone this morning?
Be ever known to patience: my dear'st sister!
Determine for her, for Caesar cannot live
Hence with thy stripes, begone!
Make it so known.
With half the bulk o' the world play'd as I pleased,
Nor I.
Though I am mad, I will not bite him: call.
To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
Give me some music, music, moody food
Before you, Lepidus.
O, break! O, break!
prognostication, I cannot scratch mine ear. Prithee,
Sir, you and I have loved, but there's not it,
And welcome, welcome! die where thou hast lived:
Is twice the other twain: but let us rear
To lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel:
She is not, madam.
The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch,
Of semblable import,--but he hath waged
But it raises the greater war between him and
And Antony, were nature's piece 'gainst fancy,
How much you were my conqueror, and that
Than she which by her death our Caesar tells
And go to't with delight.
That nature must compel us to lament
Ah, dear, if I be so,
At sea, I think.
But let determined things to destiny
And palter in the shifts of lowness, who
Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.
Our great navy's rigg'd.
What willingly he did confound he wail'd,
Claps on his sea-wing, and, like a doting mallard,
I'll fight at sea.
That Herod's head
Room for six scotches more.
Take but good note, and you shall see in him.
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Flourish. Enter ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, her Ladies, the Train, with Eunuchs fanning her
The scars upon your honour, therefore, he
Says it will come to the full. Mark Antony
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
When thou wast here above the ground, I was
Exeunt
Look, where they come:
My man of men.
How 'tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea,
SCENE XV. The same. A monument.
That call'd me timelier than my purpose hither,
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour
Let's have one other gaudy night: call to me
Mecaenas, ask Agrippa.
May do a noble deed! he brings me liberty.
Exeunt
Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
ACT V
Your heart has mind to.
To be desired to give. It much would please him,
How now, lady!
Upon the first encounter, drave them.
The gods forbid!
Taurus!
Farewell, and thanks.
Go to, then, your considerate stone.
And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart,
And the gods yield you for't!
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
Let us go. Come,
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
And seal'd between us.
wholly depends on your abode.
Then is Caesar and he for ever knit together.
Drink thou, increase the reels.
Down thy ill-uttering throat.
The lamps of night in revel, is not more man-like
Drawing a dagger
Thou, eunuch Mardian!
Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
And golden Phoebus never be beheld
Enter DIOMEDES
Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite!
serpents, have
I cannot project mine own cause so well
And made their bends adornings: at the helm
Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar,
Dolabella,
Hold unbewail'd their way. Welcome to Rome,
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Command me.
A man who is the abstract of all faults
A very fine one: O, how he loves Caesar!
The barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
But there is never a fair woman has a true face.
Of what he has, and has not.
honourable friend, Agrippa!
Hear you, sir?
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed: for shame,
Not in the power on't: so our leader's led,
Should conquer Antony, but woe 'tis so!
Pray you, stand further from me.
Let your best love draw to that point, which seeks
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MECAENAS
Where's Antony?
Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers
But being charged, we will be still by land,
Seems much unequal: he's married to Octavia.
You have not call'd me so, nor have you cause.
Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
Is it not strange, Canidius,
Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
Antony
Are in thy vessel: let me cut the cable,
The record of what injuries you did us,
Off, pluck off:
Wash the congealment from your wounds, and kiss
Who seeks, and will not take when once 'tis offer'd,
nothing. Cleopatra, catching but the least noise of
Exit THYREUS
That he approves the common liar, who
The absolute soldiership you have by land,
Madam, I heard her speak, she is low-voiced.
Enter MARK ANTONY with Attendants
And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze:
And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
The Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
Endure a further view.
I did not see him since.
Most fit for business: go make thee ready,
Caesarion, whom they call my father's son,
To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
The people know it, and have now received
Tend me to-night two hours, I ask no more,
When our quick minds lie still, and our ills told us
Bear him ashore. I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose,--
The royal occupation! thou shouldst see
Look you sad, friends?
To wash the eyes of kings.
Of war-mark'd footmen, leave unexecuted
How appears the fight?
Enter VARRIUS
the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
I do not see them bleed.
Exeunt
Why, there then: thus I do escape the sorrow
Antony only, that would make his will
What's the noise?
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
Already, will their good thoughts call from him.
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
SCENE III. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.
Nor either cares for him.
Shall enter me with him.
Where's Dolabella,
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
Where mine his thoughts did kindle,--that our stars,
The itch of his affection should not then
I had thought to have held it poor: but, since my lord
He kiss'd,--the last of many doubled kisses,--
Where died she?
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find
her die too, and give him a worse! and let worst
Music plays. Enter two or three Servants with a banquet
Enter DERCETAS and Guard
Are level now with men, the odds is gone,
I must stay his time.
I have told him, Lepidus was grown too cruel,
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow,
To let a fellow that will take rewards
Cleopatra,
Enter a Messenger
A mangled shadow: perchance to-morrow
O, my lord!
Show us the way, sir.
Therefore I pray you: I'll see you by and by.
The fortress of it, for better might we
This last day was
Here is to Caesar!
No, Antony, take the lot: but, first
The noblest, and do now not basely die,
That, when the exigent should come, which now
Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage:
Make space enough between you.
Most sovereign creature,--
That thou depart'st hence safe,
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill:
SCENE VII. Near Actium. MARK ANTONY's camp.
Into a strumpet's fool: behold and see.
To hear from me you had left Antony,
The fall of Antony!
These quick-sands, Lepidus,
I'll strike, and cry 'Take all.'
Very necessity of this thought, that I,
And then when poison'd hours had bound me up
No, let me speak, and let me rail so high,
Smarting in lingering pickle.
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
O, temperance, lady!
Strikes him again
wilt hear me,
Exeunt
And such a twain can do't, in which I bind,
Wisdom and fortune combating together,
O thou day o' the world,
He calls me boy, and chides, as he had power
That thou couldst see my wars to-day, and knew'st
Where rather I'll expect victorious life
Detain no jot, I charge thee: write to him--
To tell them that this world did equal theirs
to move in't, are the holes where eyes should be,
Are stronger than mine eyes.
Enter a Messenger
The soldier's pole is fall'n: young boys and girls
The fellow has good judgment.
Now Antony must leave her utterly.
Aboard my galley I invite you all:
He makes me angry with him, for he seems
What is most right: mine honour was not yielded,
Like friends long lost. Triple-turn'd whore!
That were excusable, that, and thousands more
When it appears to you where this begins,
As thou affect'st.
Her welcome friendly.
My heart was to thy rudder tied by the strings,
Do strongly speak to us, but the letters too
For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you
But must condemn it now. Desist, and drink.
What's Antony? The god of Jupiter.
Sir, good success!
Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten,
If we be not relieved within this hour,
Than with an old one dying.
Do so, we'll speak to them, and to-night I'll force
No, you shall paint when you are old.
Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Luxuriously pick'd out: for, I am sure,
Leaving the fight in height, flies after her:
Why do you send so thick?
And take in Toryne? You have heard on't, sweet?
Thou,--and thou,--and thou:--you have served me well,
I never hated thee: I have seen thee fight,
I will possess you of that ship and treasure.
To THYREUS
Now he'll outstare the lightning. To be furious,
Good my lord,--
This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.
Thrice-nobler than myself!
Not till he hears how Antony is touch'd
Well, I know not
poets, cannot
You would have follow'd.
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
As 'tis reported, so.
And make death proud to take us. Come, away:
I will subscribe--gentle adieus and greetings,
A rarer spirit never
Have letters from me to some friends that will
If the great gods be just, they shall assist
SCENE V. The same. Another room.
Were I the wearer of Antonius' beard,
Pray you, tell him
Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested,
Approach, ho! All's not well: Caesar's beguiled.
Even with his pestilent scythe.
O, I would thou didst,
Good night, sir.
Of those that served Mark Antony but late,
They advance to another post
Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar
The appetites they feed: but she makes hungry
And what may follow,
Be of good cheer,
Serves for the matter that is then born in't.
Come hither, sir.
Exeunt MARK ANTONY, EROS, Captains, and Soldiers
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.
Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears
My countryman,--a Roman by a Roman
The people love me, and the sea is mine,
The empire of the sea: our slippery people,
The third o' the world is yours, which with a snaffle
With very ignorance, we have kiss'd away
SCENE IX. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp.
O Antony!
Dido and her AEneas shall want troops,
If this division chance, ne'er stood between,
Exeunt
O most false love!
If it be well to live, but better 'twere
The crown o' the earth doth melt. My lord!
Or does he walk? or is he on his horse?
This morning, like the spirit of a youth
And let the queen know of our gests. To-morrow,
Half afeard to come.
By external swelling: but she looks like sleep,
That it might go on wheels!
Which serve not for his vantage, be shakes off,
Rather than purchased, what he cannot change,
Farewell.
Of him that caused it.
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter
Antony's course, you shall bereave yourself
Exit
Enter AGRIPPA at one door, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS at another
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both!
Thou art, if thou darest be, the earthly Jove:
Without the which a soldier, and his sword,
SCENE II. Alexandria. A room in the monument.
that you praised so to the queen? O, that I knew
Do bravely, horse! for wot'st thou whom thou movest?
Which is my heaven to have. Come, thou
if they suffer our departure, death's the word.
that they make, the devils mar five.
No way excuse his soils, when we do bear
Rid all the sea of pirates, then, to send
Now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies
All his revenue.
SCENE VI. Rome. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's house.
Why, madam?
And put yourself under his shrowd,
We shall thrive now. Seest thou, my good fellow?
Sooth, la, I'll help: thus it must be.
If he do, sure, he cannot weep't back again.
Being an obstruct 'tween his lust and him.
His death's upon him, but not dead.
Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side:
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
I shall do well:
Or else he seeks out us.
Long ere she did appear, the trees by the way
He is an absolute master.
Happily, amen!
Not now to hear thee sing, I take no pleasure
SCENE I. Messina. POMPEY's house.
Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
I am paid for't now.
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers, shall
Avoid, and leave him.
How now, Varrius!
How intend you, practised?
Gentle Octavia,
Enter THYREUS
though grey
There I deny my land service. But give me your
What our contempt doth often hurl from us,
SCENE XIII. Alexandria. Cleopatra's palace.
There were a heart in Egypt.
Who neigh'd so high, that what I would have spoke
Exit DOLABELLA
Isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny me a
fellowship: I had as lief have a reed that will do
He sends so poor a pinion off his wing,
Spake you of Caesar? How! the non-pareil!
Extemporally will stage us, and present
To reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet
Thy name so buried in her.
To answer like himself: if Caesar move him,
Their most absurd intents.
I wish you all joy of the worm.
Exeunt
Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.
Or would have done't myself. Your emperor
Name Cleopatra as she is call'd in Rome,
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Behold, sir.
To the monument!
Speaks to atone you.
Charmian!
Than greatness going off.
Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire
Their slimy jaws, and, as I draw them up,
Exeunt PROCULEIUS and Soldiers
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Than love that's hired! What, goest thou back? thou shalt
That all men follow.
Praying for both parts:
CANIDIUS marcheth with his land army one way over  the stage, and TAURUS, the lieutenant of OCTAVIUS  CAESAR, the other way. After their going in, is heard the noise of a sea-fight
Madam?
Than savages could suffer: thou didst drink
Enter MARDIAN
Expected: since he went from Egypt 'tis
Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
Ay, my lord,
I was of late as petty to his ends
Does pity, as constrained blemishes,
Enter MARK ANTONY and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Than could his war resisted.
Not if the small come first.
Thy full supremacy thou knew'st, and that
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, and TAURUS, with his army, marching
My salad days,
By the second hour i' the morn.
Give me leave, Caesar,--
Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought:
And at the port expect you.
Excellent.
I cannot tell.
Laden with gold, take that, divide it, fly,
But such another man!
Most gracious majesty,--
I'll give thee, friend,
SCENE IV. Athens. A room in MARK ANTONY's house.
that should desire you to touch him, for his biting
Absolute queen.
Come on, then,
Dies
My latter part of life.
Enter MARK ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, IRAS, ALEXAS, with others
Since my becomings kill me, when they do not
With what is spoke already.
Grace grow where those drops fall!
Is all afraid to govern thee near him,
Splits what it speaks: the wild disguise hath almost
To cool a gipsy's lust.
Antonius dead!--If thou say so, villain,
Where is he?
Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him,
Re-enter DOLABELLA
Some way to leave him.
The Jove of power make me most weak, most weak,
As we greet modern friends withal, and say,
Enter, below, DIOMEDES
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
Not know me yet?
Caesar hath sent--
Under this plot, she dies for't. Eros, ho!
have discredited your travel.
Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
Say, I would die.
ACT IV
Than gain which darkens him.
Have glow'd like plated Mars, now bend, now turn,
Would be eternal in our triumph: go,
but twelve persons there, is this true?
My mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingled
Why should I think you can be mine and true,
I would not shave't to-day.
Kisses OCTAVIA
My motion, have it not in my tongue: but yet
Enobarbus, welcome!
To weep, whose every passion fully strives
Thrives in our idleness.
With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts,
Rank of gross diet, shall be enclouded,
Our targes undinted.
To lend me arms and aid when I required them,
Music plays. DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS places them hand in hand
Hath nobly held, our sever'd navy too
I have many other ways to die, meantime
Let not the piece of virtue, which is set
Some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt.
In the brave squares of war: yet now--No matter.
A meaner than myself, since I myself
Disgrace and horror, that, on my command,
Have empty left their orbs, and shot their fires
O'ertake pursued success, but I do feel,
Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come,
We stand up peerless.
Favours, by Jove that thunders!
Our most persisted deeds.
His pardon for return.
His sword e'en like a dancer, while I struck
To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up:
It cannot be thus long, the sides of nature
Bring in the banquet quickly, wine enough
Let us go.
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
For we intend so to dispose you as
Where lies he?
Have often shamed our sex.
For private stomaching.
Which promises royal peril. Trumpeters,
Applauding our approach.
Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR and OCTAVIA
Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When
The gods withhold me!
SCENE II. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
And not a serpent's poison. Say, our pleasure,
Of Antony's death.
Amen.
The third part, then, is drunk: would it were all,
Enter CHARMIAN, IRAS, ALEXAS, and a Soothsayer
Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
Is come indeed, when I should see behind me
I have done my duty.
Descended of so many royal kings.
Show him your hand.
Patience is scottish, and impatience does
will blow them down.
Exeunt
Antony, thou wouldst say,--
Holds idleness your subject, I should take you
As we rate boys, who, being mature in knowledge,
As low as she would wish it.
But entertain it,
Exceeds what we expected.
With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder:
Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
Call forth my household servants: let's to-night
If you can, your reason?
Moon and stars!
To rot itself with motion.
No honourable trust. I have done ill,
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
let me have a child at fifty, to whom Herod of Jewry
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Cleopatra,
For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
his heart, upon the river of Cydnus.
He'll never yield to that.
Our lamp is spent, it's out! Good sirs, take heart:
Like to the time o' the year between the extremes
To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
When I have envied thy behavior.
Do you hear, masters? do you hear?
Most certain.
Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
With trees upon't, that nod unto the world,
In eye of Caesar's battle, from which place
Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
half that they do: but this is most fallible, the
Too late, good Diomed: call my guard, I prithee.
That thou, residing here, go'st yet with me,
Hop forty paces through the public street,
The courage of a woman, less noble mind
That fell away have entertainment, but
By sea! what else?
O Silius, Silius,
Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony,--
Go on: right royal.
In the habiliments of the goddess Isis
You shall not find,
Well, well: away!
Exit EROS
SCENE VII. On board POMPEY's galley, off Misenum.
Can equally move with them. Provide your going,
A bridegroom in my death, and run into't
Let us, Lepidus,
Enter CLEOPATRA
The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
There's sap in't yet. The next time I do fight,
He hath spoken true: the very dice obey him,
You'll win two days upon me.
storms and tempests than almanacs can report: this
My speech and what is done, tell him he has
Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
Every time
We'll feast each other ere we part, and let's
Good morrow to thee, welcome:
Do not say so, my lord.
He purposeth to Athens: whither, with what haste
Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear, lady?
Is now a widower.
Nothing, madam.
His face was as the heavens, and therein stuck
Of me for jests, but now I'll set my teeth,
They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves
Longing for what it had not, nay, the dust
The deeds of justest men.
What say'st thou?
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
contradiction, I have heard that.
Be strew'd before your feet!
We'll hear him what he says. Whence are you?
I thank you, sir,
'Twas merry when
It is the emperor, madam.
The like is on her arm.
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Your sweet dependency, and you shall find
If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
ACT II
not prophesy so.
Let me have your hand:
I grant him part, but then, in his Armenia,
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
Or bathe my dying honour in the blood
very strangler of their amity: Octavia is of a
Intends his journey, and within three days
Antony yet.
And we shall talk before we fight.
Let our best heads
In Egypt with his joy, but between both:
Now, my dearest queen,--
SCENE VII. Field of battle between the camps.
Perform 't, or else we damn thee.'
How now, friend Eros!
O heavenly mingle! Be'st thou sad or merry,
I saw her once
Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
Made the all-honour'd, honest Roman, Brutus,
With a more larger list of sceptres.
not. But, truly, these same whoreson devils do the
It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho?
and the case to be lamented: this grief is crowned
Cried he? and begg'd a' pardon?
Not sickness should detain me.
And is become the bellows and the fan
Under the service of a child as soon
He beats thee 'gainst the odds: thy lustre thickens,
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.
ACT I
She was a widow,--
the flow o' the Nile
With principalities.
Bring him again: this Jack of Caesar's shall
Our great competitor: from Alexandria
Not he that himself is not so, which is Mark Antony.
It is ashamed to bear me! Friends, come hither:
And we are for the dark.
So does it no man else. Met'st thou my posts?
SCENE XI. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
I know, by that same eye, there's some good news.
Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia: she
It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh,
Is this certain?
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, MECAENAS, GALLUS, PROCULEIUS, and others, his council of war
Condemning shadows quite.
All length is torture: since the torch is out,
Now, by my sword,--
A greater crack: the round world
mettle in death, which commits some loving act upon
Drop in my neck: as it determines, so
Exit Soothsayer
Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS
Farewell, my lord: what you shall know meantime
To play till doomsday. Bring our crown and all.
To thy fair way!
My precious queen, forbear,
And we are women's men.
cannot be cunning in her, if it be, she makes a
Embracing
I give to baser life. So, have you done?
My lord, in Athens.
Enter three or four Servitors
I look'd her in the face, and saw her led
That grew the more by reaping: his delights
Let's do so. But he sleeps.
Why, then, good night indeed.
Guess at her years, I prithee.
A little I can read.
Immortal longings in me: now no more
Demand the like.
Which some did die to look on: and all this--
You take from me a great part of myself,
Shrewdness of policy too, I grieving grant
A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence:
And bids thee study on what fair demands
The doom of Egypt.
And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
I could do more to do Antonius good,
How should that be?
what's noble,
The like from him.
Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee,
In each thing give him way, cross him nothing.
Where is the queen?
Hear it apart.
I give it you.
What, no more ceremony? See, my women!
We'll speak with thee at sea: at land, thou know'st
Hark!
Enter ALEXAS, from OCTAVIUS CAESAR
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it:
They do not go together.
SCENE VIII. Under the walls of Alexandria.
Exeunt Attendants with THYREUS
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
I and my sword will earn our chronicle:
That rids our dogs of languish?
Where is he now?
Make me not offended
It does from childishness: can Fulvia die?
Let all the number of the stars give light
I'll humbly signify what in his name,
So much as lank'd not.
We have cause to be glad that matters are so well
Caesar's sister is called Octavia.
Applying another asp to her arm
I have no ears to his request. The queen
Lie down, and stray no farther: now all labour
E'en as the o'erflowing Nilus presageth famine.
Our separation so abides, and flies,
When such a spacious mirror's set before him,
Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras: saucy lictors
SCENE III. The same. Before the palace.
If 'twill tie up thy discontented sword,
That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black,
Of the ranged empire fall! Here is my space.
To these great fellows: sound and be hang'd, sound out!
And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard?
Draws a knife
He's very knowing,
So, haply, are they friends to Antony.
Of Paphlagonia, the Thracian king, Adallas,
To make this good?
Fulvia!
Shall stain your brother: make your soonest haste,
Lord of his reason. What though you fled
With his most noble blood.
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
Give me my robe, put on my crown, I have
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand,
Go back, I warrant thee, but I'll catch thine eyes,
My noble brother!
No, no, no, no, no.
The higher our opinion, that our stirring
seems to tie their friendship together will be the
Time calls upon's:
We have, sir.
this, dies instantly, I have seen her die twenty
He was my master, and I wore my life
My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder
Forgive me in thine own particular,
The inevitable prosecution of
Be brooch'd with me, if knife, drugs,
Be't as our gods will have't! It only stands
That's my brave lord!
Early though't be, have on their riveted trim,
Ay, noble lord.
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar
I could have given less matter
A benefit in this change, but if you seek
Each man's like mine, you have shown all Hectors.
Hath given the dare to Caesar, and commands
petticoat: and indeed the tears live in an onion
Hence, saucy eunuch, peace!
My treasure's in the harbour, take it. O,
Bless her when she is riggish.
I do not know,
I had rather heat my liver with drinking.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  Why, Enobarbus,
Continues still a Jove.
With one that I have bred? The gods! it smites me
[Aside to CLEOPATRA]  'Tis one of those odd
First, madam, he is well.
Determine this great war in single fight!
A seeming mermaid steers: the silken tackle
And other of his conquer'd kingdoms, I
And hold our best advantage.
Is to do thus, when such a mutual pair
O Antony! O thou Arabian bird!
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there,
My very hairs do mutiny, for the white
It is not worth leave-taking.
Vouchsafed to think he had partners: you shall find there
Do we shake hands. All come to this? The hearts
Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
Never, he will not:
Exit
Whilst you abide here.
Not in my husband's nose.
All my sad captains, fill our bowls once more,
He vented them, most narrow measure lent me:
Gods and goddesses,
Why, that's the way
Since then hath made between them. Unto her
Make your full reference freely to my lord,
Would she had never given you leave to come!
My captain, and my emperor, let me say,
Unregister'd in vulgar fame, you have
operation of your sun: so is your crocodile.
By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
She hath pursued conclusions infinite
Frowns at this levity. Gentle lords, let's part,
Adore our errors, laugh at's, while we strut
The discontents repair, and men's reports
Enter an armed Soldier
An armour all of gold, it was a king's.
Here's sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord!
As his own state and ours,--'tis to be chid
Had our great palace the capacity
With his tinct gilded thee.
We'ld fight there too. But this it is, our foot
Confined in all she has, her monument,
That have my heart parted betwixt two friends
Cannot endure my absence.
True, sir, she was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
More womanly than he, hardly gave audience, or
The music, ho!
A soldier and his horse.
I that do bring the news made not the match.
By what did here befal me. Your wife and brother
Enter POMPEY, MENECRATES, and MENAS, in warlike manner
Antony,
Tug him away: being whipp'd,
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Caesar has taken Toryne.
That I am sudden sick: quick, and return.
Enter DEMETRIUS and PHILO
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
I had a wound here that was like a T,
[Aside]  Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will
And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians:
Sits in the wind against me.
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.
He has deserved it, were it carbuncled
Thou teachest like a fool, the way to lose him.
I did not think to draw my sword 'gainst Pompey,
Good my lord,
To SELEUCUS
In her pavilion--cloth-of-gold of tissue--
Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals,
To the monument!
As it rain'd kisses.
To draw their swords: but how the fear of us
Of many our contriving friends in Rome
And, with the rest full-mann'd, from the head of Actium
Enter a Messenger
Where their appointment we may best discover,
too short,
That from Tarentum and Brundusium
They are so.
Now, like a man of steel. You that will fight,
A thousand, sir,
The miserable change now at my end
He may recover yet.
Exit ALEXAS
If she first meet the curled Antony,
Lo, now, if it lay in their hands to make me a
To soft and gentle speech.
With keels of every kind: many hot inroads
Enter CLEOPATRA, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, and IRAS
Ingross'd by swift impress, in Caesar's fleet
Think you there was, or might be, such a man
Than drink so much in one.
Ha, ha!
Did ever love so dearly: let her live
Exeunt
Upon a tawny front: his captain's heart,
The universal landlord.
Exeunt
Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart:
Which hurts, and is desired. Dost thou lie still?
'Tis noble spoken.
The offers we have sent you.
And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends!
Sir, the gods
I'll seem the fool I am not, Antony
Themselves when they be felt.
Speak this no more.
I should do thus.
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
He'll lead me, then, in triumph?
Enter CLEOPATRA, attended
O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
Nor once be chastised with the sober eye
Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine
biting of it, what pain she felt: truly, she makes
My name is Thyreus.
Be free and healthful,--so tart a favour
He is dead, Caesar:
Yet have I fierce affections, and think
Enter VENTIDIUS as it were in triumph, with SILIUS,  and other Romans, Officers, and Soldiers, the dead body of PACORUS borne before him
Is now eclipsed, and it portends alone
I have said.
The kings o' the earth for war, he hath assembled
Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?
Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
And blemish Caesar's triumph. Let him take thee,
Provoked by my offence.
Fare thee well, dame, whate'er becomes of me:
Lay me stark naked, and let the water-flies
Enter the Messenger as before
Lock'd in her monument. She had a prophesying fear
Is come from Caesar, therefore hear it, Antony.
It's past the size of dreaming: nature wants stuff
Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,
And how you find of her.
Pack'd cards with Caesar, and false-play'd my glory
Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.
You patch'd up your excuses.
Cup us, till the world go round,
Turn your displeasure that way: for our faults
Your way is shorter,
Where's Alexas?
His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven,
it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man
Have shown to thee such a declining day,
Nay, do so, for, indeed, I have lost command,
For fear and doting. Friends, be gone: you shall
What hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge
Nor by a hired knife, but that self hand,
Cold-hearted toward me?
Did violate so itself.
No, to my cabin.
a very good report o' the worm, but he that will
And I have heard, Apollodorus carried--
That's the next to do.
With clouts about their heads.
What's thy passion!
O, from Italy
The routed fly: so thy grand captain Antony
Most heavy day!
What say you? Hence,
What I can show in this.
And when good will is show'd, though't come
Even this repays me. We sent our schoolmaster,
Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt's queen,
In soft and delicate Lethe.
And hang me up in chains!
Trouble yourselves no further: pray you, hasten
Though it be honest, it is never good
with consolation, your old smock brings forth a new
You know not what it is.
Didst thou behold Octavia?
times upon far poorer moment: I do think there is
Exeunt all but MENAS and ENOBARBUS
A better life. 'Tis paltry to be Caesar,
Ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance, and
Cast on my noble father.
Can never be so equal, that your love
Even such a body: here I am Antony:
Not cowardly put off my helmet to
Where?
In state of health thou say'st, and thou say'st free.
Take hence this Jack, and whip him.
Till, like a boy, you see him cringe his face,
The undoing of yourself: let the world see
When my good stars, that were my former guides,
Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the
Flourish
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued
Will not wait pinion'd at your master's court,
Salt Cleopatra, soften thy waned lip!
When men revolted shall upon record
from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth,
I sing but after you.
Of Cappadocia, Philadelphos, king
If that the former dare but what it can,
Say they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly,
Sit laurel victory! and smooth success
And the business you have broached here cannot be
Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!
Sir,
Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
And to proclaim it civilly, were like
Come hither, come! come, come, and take a queen
Exit CHARMIAN
He'll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
With divers-colour'd fans, whose wind did seem
Sleep a little.
Bear our hack'd targets like the men that owe them:
That I beheld:
resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly
He gives me so much of mine own, as I
Adieu, good queen, I must attend on Caesar.
Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.
Our quick remove from hence.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN
I' the market-place, on a tribunal silver'd,
from's time,
He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
To such whose place is under us, requires
To Caesar will I render
If idle talk will once be necessary,
Higher than both in blood and life, stands up
In all my writings: go with me, and see
In thee't had been good service. Thou must know,
Dead, then?
Help me, my women,--we must draw thee up:
Was 'Antony! most noble Antony!'
No.
O Charmian,
To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall
Exeunt
A lass unparallel'd. Downy windows, close,
From Sicyon, ho, the news! Speak there!
What should this mean?
And all of you clapp'd up together in
May cement their divisions and bind up
I'll think them every one an Antony,
Not moved by Antony.
Thou wouldst have mercy on me.
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
him partake in the glory of the action: and not
The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss,
Feeds beast as man: the nobleness of life
I shall do't.
From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may,
Than what he chooses.
That kills and pains not?
Does conquer him that did his master conquer
Mars what it does, yea, very force entangles
Remain in't as thou mayst.
'I am conqueror of myself.' Thou art sworn, Eros,
Yes, my lord, yes, he at Philippi kept
O my lord, my lord,
To fool their preparation, and to conquer
To have command obey'd.
foul knave uncuckolded: therefore, dear Isis, keep
Fly! not we.
There's a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it:
Would we had all such wives, that the men might go
Kiss it, my warrior: he hath fought to-day
Your speech is passion:
Now to that name my courage prove my title!
New wars 'gainst Pompey, made his will, and read it
Have tongue to charge me with.
Let's hear him, for the things he speaks
In feeding them with those my former fortunes
If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
And carry back to Sicily much tall youth
Thy business?
Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but
By sea and land, supplying every stage
Get thee gone:
Thou dost o'er-count me of my father's house:
Ho! says a' There's my cap.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS
O eastern star!
Nay, come, tell Iras hers.
Where I will write. All may be well enough.
Call on him for't: but to confound such time,
Why, this is to have a name in great men's
Peace!
Not to consider in what case thou stand'st,
Our Alexandrian revels, Antony
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK ANTONY, LEPIDUS, and OCTAVIA
Seizes and disarms her
We must return to the court of guard: the night
SCENE VI. Alexandria. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp.
Thou kill'st thy mistress: but well and free,
Divide me from your bosom.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS and LEPIDUS
Exeunt
Most noble sir, arise, the queen approaches:
Their preparation is to-day by sea,
But I had rather fast from all four days
The ne'er touch'd vestal: try thy cunning, Thyreus,
Fulvia is dead.
And it appears he is beloved of those
Unloading of his mules.
While he was yet in Rome,
Exeunt
I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky,
Made friends of them, joining their force 'gainst Caesar,
Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.--Enobarbus!
Shout. Trumpets flourish
Say not so, Agrippa:
This is an aspic's trail: and these fig-leaves
I'll never follow thy pall'd fortunes more.
And what thou think'st his very action speaks
All dead.
Enter CLEOPATRA and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
They have made him drink alms-drink.
Come, thou monarch of the vine,
Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted
I am satisfied.
That moved pale Cassius to conspire, and what
That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.
And say 'God quit you!' be familiar with
Hear me, queen:
No vessel can peep forth, but 'tis as soon
Re-enter CHARMIAN and Messenger
Have I my pillow left unpress'd in Rome,
My bluest veins to kiss, a hand that kings
No messenger, but thine, and all alone
To Lydia and to Ionia, Whilst--
Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.
My desolation does begin to make
When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
His taints and honours
O'erflows the measure: those his goodly eyes,
Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield,
Where have you this? 'tis false.
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands,
Ho! Noble captain, come.
Be comforted, dear madam.
I have a health for you.
Hark! the drums
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  What does he mean?
[Aside to MENAS]  I think thou'rt mad.
I would they'ld fight i' the fire or i' the air,
Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS, with their Army
I understand not, madam.
My Antony is away.
Exeunt
A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward
Her length of sickness, with what else more serious
Will't please you hear me?
Enter MARK ANTONY and VENTIDIUS
This treasure of an oyster, at whose foot,
Is he married?
Comes dear'd by being lack'd. This common body,
Sir, his chests and treasure
[Aside]  Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell
But was a race of heaven: they are so still,
Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
And make your peace with Caesar.
Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
I faint: O Iras, Charmian! 'tis no matter.
That head, my lord?
Amen. Dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people!
To have me out of Egypt, made wars here,
Madam, I trust, not so.
Distract your army, which doth most consist
We scorn her most when most she offers blows.
How, my love!
How now! is he dead?
On her dead mistress, tremblingly she stood
And be undone by 'em!
I am dying, Egypt, dying:
the finest part of pure love: we cannot call her
Enter, to the gates of the monument, PROCULEIUS, GALLUS and Soldiers
Know, then,
But in my bosom shall she never come,
Thou shalt be whipp'd with wire, and stew'd in brine,
So Antony loves.
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
Best to be served: whilst he stood up and spoke,
down-feather,
they'ld do't!
For the best turn i' the bed.
She shall be buried by her Antony:
Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase, and taunt my faults
It not concern'd me.
I must obey.
Make the sea serve them, which they ear and wound
Yes, forsooth: I wish you joy o' the worm.
The colour of her hair: bring me word quickly.
And bear her women from the monument:
Breed scrupulous faction: the hated, grown to strength,
Whom ne'er the word of 'No' woman heard speak,
Be nothing of our strife, if we contend,
Good majesty,
For Antony,
I never saw an action of such shame,
Thou bleed'st apace.
In time we hate that which we often fear.
These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
variance. Antony will use his affection where it is:
That drums him from his sport, and speaks as loud
And for his ordinary pays his heart
Beat the approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
To punish me for what you make me do.
By sea and land I'll fight: or I will live,
At heel of that, defy him.
And there is nothing left remarkable
'Tis the last service that I shall command you.
Your generals after.
Let's do it after the high Roman fashion,
Re-enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR and all his train marching
But now 'tis made an H.
Which never shall be found--you did suspect
Ho, ho, ho!
That the mad Brutus ended: he alone
The sides o' the world may danger: much is breeding,
Nothing more dear to me. You are abused
Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates,
What work is here! Charmian, is this well done?
Exit
O Antony,
Married to your good service, stay till death:
Exeunt
Upon this jump.
Of what I was i' the morning: but next day
But, he away, 'tis noble.
Get thee hence, farewell.
Her inclination, let him not leave out
This sword but shown to Caesar, with this tidings,
Exeunt, bearing MARK ANTONY
It hath been taught us from the primal state,
Thy spirits all of comfort! fare thee well.
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  He were the worse for that,
I told him of myself, which was as much
But let it be: I am quickly ill, and well,
It must not be with this.
Transform us not to women.
Here comes the emperor.
Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
Exeunt
If thou with Caesar paragon again
You keep by land
Her motion and her station are as one,
I know you could not lack, I am certain on't,
To praise my noble act, I hear him mock
As matter whole you have not to make it with,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which my love makes religion to obey,
[Speaking together]  How now!
Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again:
Belike 'tis but a rumour. Good night to you.
It will determine one way: fare you well.
Swoons rather, for so bad a prayer as his
I wish I could be made so many men,
Trumpets within
And I am all forgotten.
By losing of our prayers.
Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
We'll beat 'em into bench-holes: I have yet
prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?
Whose fortunes shall rise higher, Caesar's or mine?
To-morrow, soldier,
Here, at your service. My lord approaches.
Exit EUPHRONIUS
Noble, courageous high, unmatchable,
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN
He knows that you embrace not Antony
To business that we love we rise betime,
No more light answers. Let our officers
Come good fellow, put mine iron on:
Read not my blemishes in the world's report:
Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man,
So is the fame.
Who was last with them?
From thine invention, offers: women are not
But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar's
You have heard much.
Unreconciliable, should divide
Enter a Guardsman
Into the abysm of hell. If he mislike
For the main soldier: whose quality, going on,
I cannot hope
A statue than a breather.
I'll set a bourn how far to be beloved.
Exit SCARUS
SCENE IX. Another part of the plain.
Assuredly you know me.
I crave our composition may be written,
His legs bestrid the ocean: his rear'd arm
And cry 'Your will?' Have you no ears? I am
He's walking in the garden--thus, and spurns
No better than a sty? O, see, my women,
This is old: what is the success?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
Mark Antony is every hour in Rome
Farewell, fa rewell!
What's this for?
To second Proculeius?
and devils!
Approach, and speak.
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine,
With knaves that smell of sweat: say this
That which combined us was most great, and let not
Of life at once untie: poor venomous fool
A vapour sometime like a bear or lion,
Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now
It should be better he became her guest,
And sinks most lamentably. Had our general
Exeunt
To Caesar I will speak what you shall please,
He plough'd her, and she cropp'd.
Know, that to-morrow the last of many battles
So half my Egypt were submerged and made
Madam!
Made good guard for itself.
Will kneel to him with thanks.
How goes it here?
To give me conquer'd Egypt for my son,
If every of your wishes had a womb.
The elements be kind to thee, and make
That which is now a horse, even with a thought
Why?
I will employ thee back again, I find thee
By Hercules, I think I am i' the right.
Enter an Attendant
Than death and honour. Let's to supper, come,
And keep the turn of tippling with a slave,
Hark! the land bids me tread no more upon't,
Might be my question.
Put we i' the roll of conquest: still be't yours,
Where now half tales be truths: her love to both
Dies
Adieu, be happy!
The more it promises: as it ebbs, the seedsman
Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed,
Relieved, but not betray'd.
Some shipping unrestored: lastly, he frets
Hark further.
They cast their caps up and carouse together
His brother warr'd upon him, although, I think,
Gentle, hear me:
And, as the president of my kingdom, will
Dead Caesar's trencher, nay, you were a fragment
To public ear:
The while I'll place you: then the boy shall sing,
The gods confound thee! dost thou hold there still?
Trumpets sound. Exeunt
Thy dearest quit thee.
In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.
You have made me offer
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
Chief factors for the gods, I do not know
The arm of mine own body, and the heart
Give me to drink mandragora.
One word, sweet queen:
'But yet' is as a gaoler to bring forth
Whose eye beck'd forth my wars, and call'd them home,
Not till you have slept, I fear me you'll be in till then.
Lady!
Now, for the love of Love and her soft hours,
Not by a public minister of justice,
Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
Sir, sometimes, when he is not Antony,
A proper man.
From my cold heart let heaven engender hail,
And these the showers to bring it on. Be cheerful.
If that thy father live, let him repent
Make mingle with rattling tabourines,
In Alexandria: here's the manner of 't:
Here is a rural fellow
I' the posture of a whore.
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
Good madam, patience.
To one so meek, that mine own servant should
Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where
The dove will peck the estridge, and I see still,
Good madam, hear me.
Sir, sir,--
The seven-fold shield of Ajax cannot keep
Enough to purchase what you have made known.
He loses hearts: Lepidus flatters both,
'tis thou
Have slime upon them, such as the aspic leaves
Which break themselves in swearing!
Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
Raised by your populous troops: but you are come
A million more, now lost,--she, Eros, has
Full surfeits, and the dryness of his bones,
The anger'd ocean foams, with which I meant
And word it, prithee, piteously: hence, Mardian,
Even till a Lethe'd dulness!
Exeunt all but DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS and MENAS
Show me which way.
I do not like 'But yet,' it does allay
The horned herd! for I have savage cause,
I am possess'd of: 'tis exactly valued,
Diseases in our bodies: I must perforce
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
What's your name?
Requires to live in Egypt: which not granted,
[Aside to POMPEY]  Forsake thy seat, I do beseech
that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee! and let
All your true followers out.
That of his fortunes you should make a staff
'Twere pregnant they should square between
You must to Parthia: your commission's ready,
The heart of Antony, Octavia is
Who is so full of grace, that it flows over
Will never let come forth.
Bravest at the last,
Whate'er the ocean pales, or sky inclips,
To join our kingdoms and our hearts, and never
Her heart inform her tongue,--the swan's
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!
Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touch'd.
A market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
Thank you.
Madam, he's married to Octavia.
Will answer as a law.
If thou again say 'Yes.'
Is that his answer?
Keep off them, for you sink.
You shall be more beloving than beloved.
Which he achieved by the minute, lost his favour.
Or last, your fine Egyptian cookery
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Only the adulterous Antony, most large
Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
A tower'd citadel, a pendent rock,
I must not think there are
Of Comagene, Polemon and Amyntas,
O, wither'd is the garland of the war,
Madam, I will.
King Malchus of Arabia, King of Pont,
Of eyes again so royal! Your crown's awry,
O the good gods!
To the monument!
In her strong toil of grace.
So it should be, that none but Antony
A messenger from CAESAR.
Before thy face repent!
Peace, peace, Iras!
In the whole world: but yet let me lament,
Caesar's will?
I think so too. But you shall find, the band that
Retire, we have engaged ourselves too far:
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight, and could not
What should not then be spared. He is already
I' the common show-place, where they exercise.
believe all that they say, shall never be saved by
Welcome to Rome.
which pitifully disaster the cheeks.
With one that ties his points?
A blessed lottery to him.
That o'er the files and musters of the war
We will extenuate rather than enforce:
Should say myself offended, and with you
Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
Is Fulvia's death.
to three kings in a forenoon, and widow them all:
Like a right gipsy, hath, at fast and loose,
Should have shook lions into civil streets,
Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
Shall I say to Caesar
Things that are past are done with me. 'Tis thus:
But, if there be, or ever were, one such,
matter of more weight, good Isis, I beseech thee!
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows,
That art not what thou'rt sure of! Get thee hence:
In his abominations, turns you off,
I'll try you on the shore.
And leave his navy gazing.
is immortal, those that do die of it do seldom or
To excuse their after wrath: husband, I come:
When it is all to nought, and his quails ever
See where he is, who's with him, what he does:
Should have an army for an usher, and
Thy modesty can beg.
And I do think she's thirty.
O fie, fie, fie!
You do mistake your business, my brother never
Such as I am, I come from Antony:
O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See,
Let him that loves me strike me dead.
Sweep your way for you. Pray you, look not sad,
He will not fight with me, Domitius.
For he hath laid strange courtesies and great
My sword, made weak by my affection, would
The article of my oath.
What power is in Agrippa,
woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her
I should have known no less.
No more a soldier: bruised pieces, go,
Like boys unto a muss, kings would start forth,
They say, one Taurus.
Be angry, and dispatch. O, couldst thou speak,
Exeunt
Bliss in our brows' bent, none our parts so poor,
I must from this enchanting queen break off:
monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.
Here, on her breast,
His judgment too.
Like holy Phoebus' car. Give me thy hand:
You were half blasted ere I knew you: ha!
Enter two other Soldiers
To scourge the ingratitude that despiteful Rome
O, such another sleep, that I might see
Thou hast served me with much faith. What's else to say?
And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
I follow'd that I blush to look upon:
Go we to him.
it, it transmigrates.
Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know,
Well then, sustain him: O!
The little O, the earth.
For Livia and Octavia, to induce
The shirt of Nessus is upon me: teach me,
To-night we'll wander through the streets and note
Enter MARK ANTONY
Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides,
At land, indeed,
Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
The soul and body rive not more in parting
That murder'd Pompey.
'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honour,
Hush! here comes Antony.
Give me mine angle, we'll to the river: there,
of work, which not to have been blest withal would
The winds were love-sick with them, the oars were silver,
Go put on thy defences.
It is shaped, sir, like itself, and it is as broad
SCENE X. Between the two camps.
Enter MARK ANTONY and CANIDIUS
Destroy'd in such a shape.
When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,
Come, sir, come,
Get me ink and paper:
And threats the throat of that his officer
To make it clear, but do confess I have
Of many thousand kisses the poor last
her.
Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
Tell him from his all-obeying breath I hear
comforting therein, that when old robes are worn
From that great face of war, whose several ranges
To penetrative shame, whilst the wheel'd seat
Good Antony, your hand.
Come.
A' bears the third part of the world, man, see'st
Who does he accuse?
By laying defects of judgment to me, but
Enobarbus, Antony
Be't so: declare thine office.
Say 'I am none of thine.'
That has to-day escaped. I thank you all,
Speak softly, wake her not.
That speak against us! A charge we bear i' the war,
Of late upon me: I must thank him only,
Brother, good night: to-morrow is the day.
Your wisdom in the deed.
Eye well to you: your honour calls you hence,
That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving,
I'll be to Caesar, if thou pleasest not,
And fertile every wish, a million.
Cleopatra's health to drink.
They place themselves in every corner of the stage
And yonder, Caesar.
Kingdoms are clay: our dungy earth alike
It is not Caesar's natural vice to hate
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
There's strange news come, sir.
Where most she satisfies, for vilest things
Antick'd us all. What needs more words? Good night.
Sir, look well to my husband's house, and--
with garlands!
Eros,
You are too indulgent. Let us grant, it is not
Enter EUPHRONIUS, ambassador from MARK ANTONY
Drums afar off
And answer me declined, sword against sword,
A morsel for a monarch: and great Pompey
Made out of her impatience, which not wanted
About the mount Misenum.
Sufficing strokes for death.
Supposing that I lack'd it. But, on, Caesar,
I have spoke already, and it is provided,
Enter MARK ANTONY, OCTAVIUS CAESAR, OCTAVIA between them, and Attendants
She has robb'd me of my sword.
Shines o'er with civil swords: Sextus Pompeius
Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue
Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know
Flourish. Enter POMPEY and MENAS at one door,  with drum and trumpet: at another, OCTAVIUS CAESAR,  MARK ANTONY, LEPIDUS, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, MECAENAS, with Soldiers marching
Thus speaks of him at Rome: but I will hope
shower of rain as well as Jove.
For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
Equality of two domestic powers
Our written purposes before us sent,
And the Phoenicians go a-ducking, we
No, I will not:
Hadst thou done so,
Alack, our terrene moon
Exeunt with the body
Agrippa further speak.
Of Caesar seek your honour, with your safety. O!
Were to remember that the present need
Have you done yet?
'Tis sweating labour
Well said, come on.
When I was green in judgment: cold in blood,
When I forget to send to Antony,
Is this the man? Is't you, sir, that know things?
Touch their effects in this: thyself art coming
What say'st thou?
Upon himself.
He is afeard to come.
And friends with Caesar.
That you know well: something it is I would,
Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and
Good sir, give me good fortune.
She is dead too, our sovereign.
Finish, good lady, the bright day is done,
Farewell, kind Charmian, Iras, long farewell.
O Antony!--Nay, I will take thee too.
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
I shall discover all: I'll bring thee word
Was never yet for sleep.
Exeunt
The noble Antony.
SCENE V. Alexandria. MARK ANTONY's camp.
Ay, my lord.
I make not, but foresee.
His guard have brought him thither.
I shall entreat him
The breese upon her, like a cow in June,
So Fulvia told me.
O, come, Ventidius,
O Charmian, I will never go from hence.
Enobarbus!
But say, I could not help it.
You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.
Caesar's no merchant, to make prize with you
That majesty, to keep decorum, must
Mark Antony!
Enter MARK ANTONY with EUPHRONIUS, the Ambassador
Of both is flatter'd, but he neither loves,
For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
Be gentle grave unto me! rather on Nilus' mud
Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds,
The way which promises assurance, and
List, list!
Some ditch wherein to die, the foul'st best fits
In your distrust.
He is with Caesar.
Is not this buckled well?
Madam, he's well.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  He has a cloud in 's face.
We'll bury him, and then, what's brave,
Antony
There's not a minute of our lives should stretch
Or murmuring 'Where's my serpent of old Nile?'
Have lost my way for ever: I have a ship
Keep his brain fuming, Epicurean cooks
Humbly, sir, I thank you.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, DOLABELLA, THYREUS, with others
Which leaves itself: to the sea-side straightway:
That she preparedly may frame herself
They make in Italy, the borders maritime
To meet Mark Antony: sirrah Iras, go.
The cause of our expedience to the queen,
Measures of wheat to Rome, this 'greed upon
Last thing he did, dear queen,
Our care and pity is so much upon you,
Be bounteous at our meal.
Did you too much disquiet: for that you must
Acquire too high a fame when him we serve's away.
Of thy intents desires instruction,
The news is true, my lord, he is descried,
Well,
Enter a Messenger
And all the unlawful issue that their lust
Ay me, most wretched,
With looking on his life.
I have no power upon you, hers you are.
We have beat them to their beds. What, girl!
Nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
Worthily spoken, Mecaenas.
In top of all design, my mate in empire,
Exeunt
Sir, I will eat no meat, I'll not drink, sir,
Did urge me in his act: I did inquire it,
And hear me speak a word.
Even make me wild: O slave, of no more trust
To say the dead are well: bring it to that,
My sword is drawn.
Made wars upon me, and their contestation
Flourish, and shout within, 'Make way there: Octavius Caesar!'
But let it be. Bring me to Antony.
Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
Enter CLEOPATRA led by CHARMIAN and IRAS, EROS following
It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
Caesar must think,
My lord?
And in our sports my better cunning faints
A better ear. Menas, I did not think
Are all too dear for me: lie they upon thy hand,
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself,
Madam, madam,--
I have eyes upon him,
Tawny-finn'd fishes, my bended hook shall pierce
Both he loves.
Yes, something you can deny for your own
And citizens to their dens: the death of Antony
Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
Of my good purposes, and put your children
O, never was there queen
Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Mecaenas! My
O that brave Caesar!
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
Exit CLEOPATRA
A poor Egyptian yet. The queen my mistress,
Than by the negligent.
The manner of his speech, for't cannot be
Should my performance perish.
SCENE II. Rome. The house of LEPIDUS.
But how, but how? give me particulars.
I am so lated in the world, that I
Ay, Lepidus.
The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
Bear us an errand to him.
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar,
What colour is it of?
Not lack your company.
Nay, that's certain.
The beggar's nurse and Caesar's.
You can do better yet, but this is meetly.
Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword
In Rome, as well as I	mechanic slaves
Excellent falsehood!
Will catch at us, like strumpets, and scald rhymers
light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn,
name for an ass.
I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
Exeunt
Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares?
When as your husband all in rage to-day
trimming, the other, that at dinner they should not
The consequence is then thy jealous fits
But to our honour's great disparagement,
With lesser weight but not with lesser woe,
Beheaded publicly for his offence.
What is she?
thee, hind!
dry basting.
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.
ANTIPHOLUS
Let my master in, Luce.
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with
Upon what bargain do you give it me?
Ay, but not rough enough.
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind,
What, thou meanest an officer?
for such store,
That by misfortunes was my life prolong'd,
And feeds from home, poor I am but his stale.
Once this,--your long experience of her wisdom,
And you the calendars of their nativity,
There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
ANTIPHOLUS
drudge, or diviner, laid claim to me, call'd me
My way is now to hie home to his house,
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If here you housed him, here he would have been,
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence.
A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch,
My ring away. This course I fittest choose,
They can be meek that have no other cause.
Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave
[Within]  It seems thou want'st breaking: out upon
I bought and brought up to attend my sons.
much to say 'God make me a light wench.' It is
I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your
I will not stay to-night for all the town,
What please yourself, sir: I have made it for you.
Those,--for their parents were exceeding poor,--
I'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for
Will you be bound for nothing? be mad, good master:
You have no stomach having broke your fast,
Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome: we would
And then receive my money for the chain.
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock,
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?
At board he fed not for my urging it,
worth, to season.
Farewell till then: I will go lose myself
Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
ANTIPHOLUS
No, sir, 'tis in grain, Noah's flood could not do it.
Look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty,
And soon and safe arrived where I was.
A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff,
ANTIPHOLUS
Have won his grace to come in person hither
Fear me not, man, I will not break away:
Thou say'st his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings:
Were not my doors lock'd up and I shut out?
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing,
ANTIPHOLUS
If it be, sir, I pray you, eat none of it.
Have patience, sir, O, let it not be so!
Worthily term'd them merciless to us!
But, soft! I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone,
But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky:
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.
I am transformed, master, am I not?
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not
If by strong hand you offer to break in
And this it was, for other means was none:
And therefore let me have him home with me.
Besides her urging of her wreck at sea,--
you hindered by the sergeant, to tarry for the hoy
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
Well, I'll break in: go borrow me a crow.
But she tells to your highness simple truth!
Dost thou not know?
comes that the wenches say 'God damn me,' that's as
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.
With him his bondman, all as mad as he--
ANTIPHOLUS
The saddler had it, sir, I kept it not.
Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies,
Good Lord! you use this dalliance to excuse
ANTIPHOLUS
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse
I pray you, air, as you sit at dinner:
I never spake with her in all my life.
Which of you two did dine with me to-day?
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence
Heard you confess you had the chain of him
understand them.
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all,
The time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow
With circumstance and oaths so to deny
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust:
Nay, then, thus:
and I know not what use to put her to but to make a
Be patient, for I will not let him stir
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.
I think I had, I never did deny it.
Why thou departed'st from thy native home
He came to me and I deliver'd it.
We'll draw cuts for the senior: till then lead thou first.
It seems his sleeps were hinder'd by thy railing,
Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE
O most unhappy strumpet!
And in our sight they three were taken up
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.
The enmity and discord which of late
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
hath great care to please his wife.
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
a wherefore.
The money that you owe me for the chain.
On purpose shut the doors against his way.
armadoes of caracks to be ballast at her nose.
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
There is your money that I had to keep.
And welcome more common, for that's nothing but words.
The seas wax'd calm, and we discovered
ANTIPHOLUS
Because that I familiarly sometimes
Thou hast suborn'd the goldsmith to arrest me.
ANTIPHOLUS
While she with harlots feasted in my house.
Wear gold: and no man that hath a name,
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.
Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.
ANTIPHOLUS
Oh, sir, upon her nose all o'er embellished with
And, gentle master, I received no gold,
his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a
That by this sympathized one day's error
at the gate?
And I, to blame, have held him here too long.
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus:
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
Could all my travels warrant me they live.
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal:
No, sir, not I, I came from Syracuse.
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain,
I think it be, sir, I deny it not.
Tell me, was he arrested on a band?
Thou know'st we parted: but perhaps, my son,
There's no time for a man to recover his hair that
I will, my lord.
Enter ANGELO with the chain
long spoon.
But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth
Most mighty duke, behold a man much wrong'd.
And these two Dromios, one in semblance,--
By force took Dromio and my son from them
That thus so madly thou didst answer me?
That you would put me to this shame and trouble,
Than I stand debted to this gentleman:
Enter DUKE SOLINUS, attended, AEGEON bareheaded, with the Headsman and other Officers
SCENE II. The house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
ACT IV
This purse of ducats I received from you,
ANTIPHOLUS
No, sir, I think the meat wants that I have.
ass.
Exeunt all but Antipholus of Syracuse, Antipholus of Ephesus, Dromio of Syracuse and Dromio of Ephesus
In good time, sir, what's that?
And for what cause thou camest to Ephesus.
Hath homely age the alluring beauty took
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus,
And every one doth call me by my name.
Swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing half so
I mean not cuckold-mad,
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
Is growing to me by Antipholus,
That would behold in me this shameful sport.
She is so hot because the meat is cold,
written, they appear to men like angels of light:
Good people enter and lay hold on him.
From my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it:
As all the metal in your shop will answer.
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine
If I dream not, thou art AEmilia:
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
ANTIPHOLUS
knave's pate.
Have suffer'd wrong, go keep us company,
They'll go or come: if so, be patient, sister.
To me she speaks, she moves me for her theme:
Good, now, hold thy tongue.
I will not hence and leave my husband here:
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, this is strange. Go call the abbess hither.
Exeunt
I am not in a sportive humour now:
And, not without some scandal to yourself,
And, which was strange, the one so like the other,
You minion, you, are these your customers?
If voluble and sharp discourse be marr'd,
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred,
A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind,
Chased us away, till, raising of more aid,
Had not their bark been very slow of sail,
Her part, poor soul! seeming as burdened
Anon, I'm sure, the duke himself in person
You come not home because you have no stomach,
Say that I linger'd with you at your shop
Such as seafaring men provide for storms,
ANTIPHOLUS
Unless it be by inspiration.
If he should scorn me so apparently.
Mistress, both man and master is possess'd,
Free from these slanders and this open shame!
Lords of the wide world and wild watery seas,
Hopeless and helpless doth AEgeon wend,
With her I lived in joy, our wealth increased
Where would you had remain'd until this time,
Who talks within there? ho, open the door!
AEgeon art thou not? or else his ghost?
To bear the extremity of dire mishap!
One that before the judgement carries poor souls to hell.
When he demean'd himself rough, rude and wildly.
May it please your grace, Antipholus, my husband,
Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.
Complain unto the duke of this indignity.
I'll weep what's left away, and weeping die.
And may it be that you have quite forgot
man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
One Angelo, a goldsmith: do you know him?
Thither I must, although against my will,
ANTIPHOLUS
Therefore, merchant, I'll limit thee this day
Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner,
They stand at the door, master, bid them welcome hither.
And fashion your demeanor to my looks,
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair:
This touches me in reputation.
wondrous fat marriage.
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
O, yes, if any hour meet a sergeant, a' turns back for
Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.
I'll utter what my sorrows give me leave.
If Time be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
And happy were I in my timely death,
Away! they'll kill us.
Even for the service that long since I did thee,
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
What, was I married to her in my dream?
In what safe place you have bestow'd my money,
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse and DROMIO of Syracuse
And afterward consort you till bed-time:
The unviolated honour of your wife.
A most outrageous fit of madness took him,
[Within]  Let him knock till it ache.
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
I should kick, being kick'd, and, being at that pass,
He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.
Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more,
Not that Adam that kept the Paradise but that Adam
If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
To her will we to dinner.
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?
Go fetch me something: I'll break ope the gate.
In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.
Wherefore? for my dinner: I have not dined to-day.
And, I think, if my breast had not been made of
ANTIPHOLUS
I will discharge my bond and thank you too.
The duke and all that know me in the city
To make a rescue?
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,
Ay me, it is my husband! Witness you,
Stop in your wind, sir: tell me this, I pray:
Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.
Pretty and witty, wild, and yet, too, gentle:
What hath befall'n of them and thee till now.
Sir, I commend you to your own content.
ANTIPHOLUS
And bring thy master home immediately.
By this, I think, the dial points at five:
First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
Upon mine hostess there: good sir, make haste.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
And ill it doth beseem your holiness
What, will you walk with me about the town,
Do you hear, you minion? you'll let us in, I hope?
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, here begins his morning story right,
My wife, her sister, and a rabble more
Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told me what
But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
time for all things.
If thou art changed to aught, 'tis to an ass.
ANTIPHOLUS
Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
For what reason?
With urging helpless patience wouldst relieve me,
ACT III
To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper?
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
And by the doom of death end woes and all.
ANTIPHOLUS
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
In what part of her body stands Ireland?
ANTIPHOLUS
I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
O,--sixpence, that I had o' Wednesday last
ANTIPHOLUS
After you first forswore it on the mart:
ANTIPHOLUS
Dissembling villain, thou speak'st false in both.
ANTIPHOLUS
Master, shall I be porter at the gate?
As, nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
And floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,
And since I have not much importuned you,
me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and
But to procrastinate his lifeless end.
By men of Epidamnum he and I
drop in his porridge.
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years
So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
If I should pay your worship those again,
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse with his rapier drawn, and DROMIO of Syracuse
And bear him home for his recovery.
I sent you money, sir, to be your bail,
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
ANTIPHOLUS
Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad,
And here we wander in illusions:
Not mad, but mated, how, I do not know.
I did not see you since you sent me hence,
What is your will that I shall do with this?
No evil lost is wail'd when it is gone.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse
bass-viol, in a case of leather, the man, sir,
idiot, patch!
When I bestrid thee in the wars and took
And bid the lady abbess come to me.
any man to answer it that breaks his band, one that
I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord,--
That goldsmith there, were he not pack'd with her,
To see the making of her carcanet,
ANTIPHOLUS
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey.
I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine:
I pray you, sir, receive the money now,
If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Could witness it, for he was with me then,
Of credit infinite, highly beloved,
For these deep shames and great indignities.
Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's dam, and here
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
Ran hither to your grace, whom I beseech
With all my heart, I'll gossip at this feast.
Look'd he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?
it too, or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders.
Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.
rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich
And take perforce my husband from the abbess.
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse, from the bay
Exit
[Within]  The porter for this time, sir, and my name
I will debate this matter at more leisure
Made it for me, sir! I bespoke it not.
Rings, jewels, any thing his rage did like.
methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry,
Basting.
Sweet mistress--what your name is else, I know not,
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
There had she not been long, but she became
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband:
That hath abused and dishonour'd me
ANTIPHOLUS
O villain! thou hast stolen both mine office and my name.
If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed,
A grievous fault! Say, woman, didst thou so?
Are their males' subjects and at their controls:
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,
I am sorry, sir, that I have hinder'd you,
If every one knows us and we know none,
And so tell your master.
What I should think of this, I cannot tell:
The folded meaning of your words' deceit.
What art thou that keepest me out from the house I owe?
That's a fault that water will mend.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come, go along, my wife is coming yonder.
These people saw the chain about his neck.
Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
the street.
Will you go with me? We'll mend our dinner here?
Thank me, sir, for what?
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than he's
The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
I see we still did meet each other's man,
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak,
Go back again, and be new beaten home?
I ne'er saw Syracusa in my life.
This fool-begg'd patience in thee will be left.
And charged him with a thousand marks in gold,
For what obscured light the heavens did grant
Within this hour it will be dinner-time:
In seven short years, that here my only son
Mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart,
Here comes your man, now is your husband nigh.
Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine,
To Epidamnum, till my factor's death
Had fasten'd him unto a small spare mast,
The sailors sought for safety by our boat,
ANTIPHOLUS
Till, gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
There's not a man I meet but doth salute me
O, if thou be'st the same AEgeon, speak,
And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus,
Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the Courtezan, and PINCH
Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.
I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders,
God, for thy mercy! they are loose again.
That in such haste I sent to seek his master!
ANTIPHOLUS
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?
No, trust me, sir, nor I.
Then fairly I bespoke the officer
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight:
ANTIPHOLUS
Even in the strength and height of injury!
Nay, he's a thief too: have you not heard men say
Hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue
A man is master of his liberty:
If we obey them not, this will ensue,
And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring
For know, my love, as easy mayest thou fall
warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn a
But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.
Sing, siren, for thyself and I will dote:
Your sauciness will jest upon my love
Saving your merry humour, here's the note
As much or more would we ourselves complain:
Quoth who?
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
ANTIPHOLUS
And with his mad attendant and himself,
privy marks I had about me, as, the mark of my
Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true,
Even in the spring of love, thy love-springs rot?
Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess!
Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?
Or I'll attach you by this officer.
O perjured woman! They are both forsworn:
And did not she herself revile me there?
My master preaches patience to him and the while
That's a question: how shall we try it?
Horn-mad, thou villain!
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and the Officer
ANTIPHOLUS
unruly boys.
ANTIPHOLUS
To make of him a formal man again:
Have scared thy husband from the use of wits.
Look, when I serve him so, he takes it ill.
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
answered him well.
And therefore comes it that his head is light.
And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us:
For, since the mortal and intestine jars
the devil.
But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
ANTIPHOLUS
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath,
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
And break it with a deep-divorcing vow?
Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs,
Why, give it to my wife and fetch your money.
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.
That I was sent for nothing but a rope!
As this is false he burdens me withal!
Came to my house and took away my ring--
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool,
Master Antipholus,--
And many such-like liberties of sin:
Therefore depart and leave him here with me.
Nay, 'tis for me to be patient, I am in adversity.
How now sir! is your merry humour alter'd?
No, I am an ape.
Sister, you know he promised me a chain,
Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?
I'll fetch my sister, to get her good will.
Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman, one
And what's a fever but a fit of madness?
I hope I shall have leisure to make good,
Come, go: I will fall prostrate at his feet
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
ANTIPHOLUS
beggar wont her brat, and, I think when he hath
There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
To none of these, except it be the last,
Who wanting guilders to redeem their lives
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee:
That here and there his fury had committed.
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.
shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my
she'll burn a week longer than the whole world.
Sconce call you it? so you would leave battering, I
hip to hip.
At eighteen years became inquisitive
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
How dost thou mean a fat marriage?
No, none by me.
Exit
And art confederate with a damned pack
And take unmingled that same drop again,
Thou say'st his sports were hinderd by thy brawls:
Ay, sir, and wherefore, for they say every why hath
ANTIPHOLUS
And the great care of goods at random left
ANTIPHOLUS
Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse
Where Balthazar and I did dine together.
Nell, sir, but her name and three quarters, that's
Exit
Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth,
ANTIPHOLUS
But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,
''Tis dinner-time,' quoth I, 'My gold!' quoth he,
Of you, my sons, and till this present hour
Till I have brought him to his wits again,
Hold, hurt him not, for God's sake! he is mad.
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an
Among my wife and her confederates,
Exeunt
I have not breathed almost since I did see it.
Lay open to my earthy-gross conceit,
There is a purse of ducats, let her send it:
ANTIPHOLUS
thinks a man always going to bed, and says, 'God
Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous?
If this be not a dream I see and hear.
An if I have not, sir, I hope you have,
But surely master, not a rag of money.
'Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack and be gone.
Which of these sorrows is he subject to?
Against thee presently, if thou darest stand.
Well, sir, I thank you.
And not being able to buy out his life
That's my sister.
That never meat sweet-savor'd in thy taste,
For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald and therefore
Go, Dromio, there's the money, bear it straight,
being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.
ANTIPHOLUS
Yet, that the world may witness that my end
Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown:
ANTIPHOLUS
And with no face, as 'twere, outfacing me,
You're sad, Signior Balthazar: pray God our cheer
I think I did, sir, I deny it not.
me turn i' the wheel.
Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.
To be disturb'd, would mad or man or beast:
ANTIPHOLUS
this noise?
Ay, and let none enter, lest I break your pate.
skin that was killed for the Prodigal, he that came
Have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
At any Syracusian marts and fairs,
Be quiet and depart: thou shalt not have him.
Against the laws and statutes of this town,
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and DROMIO of Ephesus
And pay the sum that may deliver me.
And draw within the compass of suspect
Have written strange defeatures in my face:
Due for a chain your husband had of him.
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.
To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.
And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.
I, sir, am Dromio, pray, let me stay.
You say he dined at home, the goldsmith here
I know a wench of excellent discourse,
Mistress, 'respice finem,' respect your end, or
I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now:
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?
Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear:
For God's sake, send some other messenger.
Had made provision for her following me
is Dromio.
If any born at Ephesus be seen
He ask'd me for a thousand marks in gold:
Gave healthful welcome to their shipwreck'd guests,
Even now, even here, not half an hour since.
Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.
By thee, and this thou didst return from him,
I crave your pardon. Soon at five o'clock,
What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
Exit
Master, there is a bark of Epidamnum
To give me ample satisfaction
All this my sister is, or else should be.
I answer you! what should I answer you?
ANTIPHOLUS
What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me.
Dined at home! Thou villain, what sayest thou?
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
Because their business still lies out o' door.
Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
Dispersed those vapours that offended us,
That he did plead in earnest? yea or no?
By rushing in their houses, bearing thence
His goods confiscate to the duke's dispose,
A nut, a cherry-stone,
lost hair of another man.
[Within]  Break any breaking here, and I'll break your
ANTIPHOLUS
To go with us into the abbey here
Stray'd his affection in unlawful love?
Whom whilst I labour'd of a love to see,
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither:
My present business calls me from you now.
Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, let us go.
I see these witches are afraid of swords.
ANTIPHOLUS
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald
That floated with thee on the fatal raft?
Be ruled by me: depart in patience,
ANTIPHOLUS
Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this:
Denies that saying. Sirrah, what say you?
This is the fairy land: O spite of spites!
I'll to the mart, and there for Dromio stay
He meant he did me none, the more my spite.
I promised your presence and the chain,
Sirrah, if any ask you for your master,
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.
I think thou art an ass.
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.
Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
These are the parents to these children,
A man is well holp up that trusts to you:
pate of father Time himself.
Let not my sister read it in your eye,
He broke from those that had the guard of him,
I have some marks of yours upon my pate,
That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
Your cake there is warm within, you stand here in the cold:
Ill-faced, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere,
Unless a thousand marks be levied,
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.
It shall not need, thy father hath his life.
ANTIPHOLUS
I will not harbour in this town to-night:
Did this companion with the saffron face
Am better than thy dear self's better part.
And then you fled into this abbey here,
Or else you may return without your money.
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons:
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
Give me thy hand.
How long hath this possession held the man?
Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.
Yet this my comfort: when your words are done,
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast
ANTIPHOLUS
'I know,' quoth he, 'no house, no wife, no mistress.'
Where Scotland?
Exit
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.
He shall not die, so much we tender him.
A joyful mother of two goodly sons,
And thereupon these errors are arose.
ANTIPHOLUS
Some tender money to me, some invite me,
Fasten'd ourselves at either end the mast,
And make a common of my serious hours.
Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
But for their owner, master, and yourself.
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns Nay, more,
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
blows, and withal so doubtfully that I could scarce
For he is bound to sea and stays but for it.
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.
And therewithal took measure of my body.
Without addition or diminishing,
Even now a tailor call'd me in his shop
Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
turn witch.
And in the instant that I met with you
Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day?
Ere I learn love, I'll practise to obey.
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix'd,
And I am witness with her that she did.
ANTIPHOLUS
What ruins are in me that can be found,
That love I begg'd for you he begg'd of me.
By running fast.
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.
Consent to pay thee that I never had!
ANTIPHOLUS
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.
By him not ruin'd? then is he the ground
SCENE II. A public place.
Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here?
We talk with goblins, owls and sprites:
Else would he never so demean himself.
To know the reason of this strange restraint.
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
Enter ADRIANA and LUCIANA
And, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
Upon what cause?
And yielding to him humours well his frenzy.
To him one of the other twins was bound,
And yet would herein others' eyes were worse.
This woman lock'd me out this day from dinner:
Some offer me commodities to buy:
Certes, she did, the kitchen-vestal scorn'd you.
strikes one.
But, if thou live to see like right bereft,
His incivility confirms no less.
ANTIPHOLUS
That he is borne about invisible:
They say this town is full of cozenage,
And soon at supper-time I'll visit you
welcome dear.
Villain, thou liest, for even her very words
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
You are not Pinch's patient, are you, sir?
Spake he so doubtfully, thou couldst not feel his meaning?
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown:
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Is that the chain you promised me to-day?
Between them they will kill the conjurer.
And come with naked swords.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.
'Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?'
Master, be wise: an if you give it her,
she comes in the habit of a light wench: and thereof
Her sober virtue, years and modesty,
For locking me out of my doors by day.
This very day a Syracusian merchant
That kitchen'd me for you to-day at dinner:
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain:
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.
You are a merry man, sir: fare you well.
Exeunt all but Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse
As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.
For forty ducats is too much to lose.
ANTIPHOLUS
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other:
I'll to the Centaur, to go seek this slave:
In Syracusa was I born, and wed
And I will please you what you will demand.
All gather to see them
SCENE I. A hall in DUKE SOLINUS'S palace.
And strike you home without a messenger.
From whom my absence was not six months old
Speak, old AEgeon, if thou be'st the man
Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.
Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
It was the copy of our conference:
Have I been patron to Antipholus,
let me in.
Good sir, be patient.
Get you home
ANTIPHOLUS
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.
Time is their master, and, when they see time,
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
What then became of them I cannot tell
But were we burdened with like weight of pain,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Nay, not sound, I pray you.
What now? how chance thou art return'd so soon?
And wander up and down to view the city.
SCENE III. A public place.
What woman's man? and how besides thyself? besides thyself?
am I myself?
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
A fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough,
You wrong me more, sir, in denying it:
something. But say, sir, is it dinner-time?
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me:
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer,
SCENE I. The house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
Which accidentally are met together.
As if Time were in debt! how fondly dost thou reason!
By the way we met
But had he such a chain of thee or no?
ANTIPHOLUS
Beating him
But your reason was not substantial, why there is no
To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
ANTIPHOLUS
Certain ones then.
So fly I from her that would be my wife.
A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.
so plentiful an excrement?
ANTIPHOLUS
I know thou canst, and therefore see thou do it.
A doubtful warrant of immediate death,
Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.
I from my mistress come to you in post,
ANTIPHOLUS
Possess'd with such a gentle sovereign grace,
And that is false thou dost report to us.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and DROMIO of Ephesus from the courtezan's
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed!
But, soft! my door is lock'd. Go bid them let us in.
Come, go with us, we'll look to that anon:
Of his heart's meteors tilting in his face?
There is a fat friend at your master's house,
ANTIPHOLUS
Nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears
Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss,
Exit one to Abbess
For certain ducats: he with none return'd
Why, but there's many a man hath more hair than wit.
To separate the husband and the wife.
O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit.
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus with a rope's-end
At your important letters,--this ill day
[Within]  Can you tell for whose sake?
Hapless AEgeon, whom the fates have mark'd
God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!
For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
Was carried with more speed before the wind,
If it were chain'd together, and therefore came not.
[Within]  Who is that at the door that keeps all
I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
I durst have denied that, before you were so choleric.
By computation and mine host's report.
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.
to the world's end will have bald followers.
And I with him.
They offer to bind Dromio of Ephesus
Unless I spake, or look'd, or touch'd, or carved to thee.
I shall receive the money for the same.
Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister,
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
For she will score your fault upon my pate.
And much different from the man he was,
And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,
Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.
That he did buffet thee, and, in his blows,
Alone, it was the subject of my theme,
Haply, in private.
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
His word might bear my wealth at any time.
And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.
These ducats pawn I for my father here.
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
Master, here's the gold you sent me for. What, have
And will have no attorney but myself,
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
[Within]  Faith, no, he comes too late,
ANTIPHOLUS
I to this fortune that you see me in.
You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders,
Nay, and you will not, sir, I'll take my heels.
My soul would sue as advocate for thee.
And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man,
Or lose my labour in assaying it.
Before the always wind-obeying deep
It is the devil.
'Tis true, she rides me and I long for grass.
Then pleaded I for you.
long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.
Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot!
ANTIPHOLUS
Ill d eeds are doubled with an evil word.
Smother'd in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
More company! The fiend is strong within him.
[Within]  And you said no.
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
Is apprehended for arrival here,
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours:
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.
Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know,
countries in her.
As if I were their well-acquainted friend,
Being compact of credit, that you love us,
SCENE II. The same.
For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
Fortune had left to both of us alike
Hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea?
What gold is this? what Adam dost thou mean?
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
bark Expedition put forth to-night, and then were
ANTIPHOLUS
I see the jewel best enamelled
To-day did dine together. So befall my soul
ANTIPHOLUS
And the twin Dromio all were taken up,
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised,
The ring I saw upon his finger now--
Forced me to seek delays for them and me.
Well, sir, then 'twill be dry.
Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain:
Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye
Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicel, Gillian, Ginn!
ANTIPHOLUS
Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there!
The meat is cold because you come not home,
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.
Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel
That desperately he hurried through the street,
And that this body, consecrate to thee,
According to the statute of the town,
Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too well feel his
Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the Courtezan, and others
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
ANTIPHOLUS
My liege, I am advised what I say,
Transform me then, and to your power I'll yield.
[Within]  What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?
My wife--but, I protest, without desert--
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.
I know it well, sir, lo, here is the chain.
SCENE IV. A street.
Master, knock the door hard.
And that supposed by the common rout
Husband, I'll dine above with you to-day
For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather,
Fie, brother! how the world is changed with you!
Striking him
Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse
Which doth amount to three odd ducats more
How hast thou lost thy breath?
I could not speak with Dromio since at first
A husband's office? shall, Antipholus.
ANTIPHOLUS
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.
clean kept: for why, she sweats, a man may go over
But till this afternoon his passion
O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
But, I pray, sir why am I beaten?
My heavy burden ne'er delivered.
Thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name or thy
At length, another ship had seized on us,
My mistress made it one upon my cheek:
What, are you mad, that you do reason so?
The venom clamours of a jealous woman
shoes in the grime of it.
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
And gain a husband by his liberty.
No, bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.
No, not a creature enters in my house.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.
He had, my lord: and when he ran in here,
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.
But he, I thank him, gnaw'd in two my cords:
ANTIPHOLUS
Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.
Sure, these are but imaginary wiles
Had hoisted sail and put to sea to-day:
That like a football you do spurn me thus?
In this the madman justly chargeth them.
fain have either.
Made daily motions for our home return:
Good sister, let us dine and never fret:
Can witness with me that it is not so
By prosperous voyages I often made
She had transform'd me to a curtal dog and made
ANTIPHOLUS
deliver you.
ANTIPHOLUS
The oil, the balsamum and aqua-vitae.
That others touch, and often touching will
Come, sister: I am press'd down with conceit--
Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.
I am possess'd with an adulterate blot,
He is my prisoner: if I let him go,
[Within]  If thy name be call'd Luce--Luce, thou hast
Two ships from far making amain to us,
she is spherical, like a globe, I could find out
Let's call more help to have them bound again.
What I told you then,
where's the chain? I pray you, let me see it.
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
I think thou art in mind, and so am I.
The place of death and sorry execution,
Patience unmoved! no marvel though she pause,
He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,
Upon my life, by some device or other
Exeunt
Went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
And what said he?
Say, didst thou speak with him? know'st thou his mind?
ANTIPHOLUS
Alas, poor women! make us but believe,
Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?
Yet hath my night of life some memory,
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
May answer my good will and your good welcome here.
I, gentle mistress.
but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a
The chain unfinish'd made me stay thus long.
Is't good to soothe him in these contraries?
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence!
But I confess, sir, that we were lock'd out.
Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
Known unto these, and to myself disguised!
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus
And all that are assembled in this place,
You know no Centaur? you received no gold?
ANTIPHOLUS
Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness:
'Fly pride,' says the peacock: mistress, that you know.
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
Give me your hand and let me feel your pulse.
And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner,
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks,
Here is thy fee, arrest him, officer,
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable:
Neither my husband nor the slave return'd,
While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum,
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
Of very reverend reputation, sir,
ANTIPHOLUS
She whom thou gavest to me to be my wife,
My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him,
Both one and other he denies me now.
A dead-looking man: this pernicious slave,
'Tis double wrong, to truant with your bed
And careful hours with time's deformed hand
Do so. This jest shall cost me some expense.
That thou art thus estranged from thyself?
I cannot, nor I will not, hold me still,
Here comes the almanac of my true date.
Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,--
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And I was ta'en for him, and he for me,
But we that know what 'tis to fast and pray
Some devils ask but the parings of one's nail,
Cries out, I was possess'd. Then all together
Between you I shall have a holy head.
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
I went to seek him: in the street I met him
Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,
ANTIPHOLUS
O Lord, I must laugh!
He is deformed, crooked, old and sere,
Thou hast thine own form.
ANTIPHOLUS
by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.
ANTIPHOLUS
Perdie, your doors were lock'd and you shut out.
faith and my heart of steel,
In company I often glanced it,
ANTIPHOLUS
In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.
ANTIPHOLUS
ANTIPHOLUS
Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
Until I know this sure uncertainty,
Some get within him, take his sword away:
Of such a burden, male twins, both alike:
And then go to my inn and dine with me?
First he denied you had in him no right.
ANTIPHOLUS
Ah, but I think him better than I say,
Your worship's wife, my mistress at the Phoenix,
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail
And by me, had not our hap been bad.
And that shall bail me, hie thee, slave, be gone!
ANTIPHOLUS
And passed sentence may not be recall'd
Neither: he took this place for sanctuary,
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
You have prevailed: I will depart in quiet,
Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?
Have at you with a proverb--Shall I set in my staff?
Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself:
Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine:
Met us again and madly bent on us,
The reason that I gather he is mad,
And in that glorious supposition think
ANTIPHOLUS
And would have reft the fishers of their prey,
Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou darest.
An if the wind blow any way from shore,
O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself!
had rather have it a head: an you use these blows
Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.
There's nothing situate under heaven's eye
And show'd me silks that he had bought for me,
ANTIPHOLUS
By what rule, sir?
And which the spirit? who deciphers them?
Herein you war against your reputation
I buy a thousand pound a year: I buy a rope.
And then return and sleep within mine inn,
when you may.
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint,
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.
ANTIPHOLUS
against her heir.
Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds
Beaten the maids a-row and bound the doctor
ANTIPHOLUS
What, will you murder me? Thou gaoler, thou,
Money by me! heart and goodwill you might,
I never came within these abbey-walls,
Of my defeatures. My decayed fair
And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
ANTIPHOLUS
Thy sister's sister.
ANTIPHOLUS
He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
Yet I will favour thee in what I can.
And thereof came it that the man was mad.
ANTIPHOLUS
Not know my voice! O time's extremity,
ACT V
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost: yet he loseth
Be secret-false: what need she be acquainted?
'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
Come, sister. Dromio, play the porter well.
'My mistress, sir' quoth I, 'Hang up thy mistress!
Whom I made lord of me and all I had,
What is the course and drift of your compact?
ANTIPHOLUS
Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatsoever a
And told thee to what purpose and what end.
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.
Beating him
A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well,
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
I hazarded the loss of whom I loved.
ANTIPHOLUS
A mere anatomy, a mountebank,
Enter three or four, and offer to bind him. He strives
Exeunt all but Adriana, Luciana, Officer and Courtezan
Are my discourses dull? barren my wit?
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.
Gave any tragic instance of our harm:
And by the benefit of his wished light,
His company must do his minions grace,
For there's the house: that chain will I bestow--
Faith, I saw it not, but I felt it hot in her breath.
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig and recover the
Thy mistress' marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?
This I wonder at,
Unto a woman, happy but for me,
it in a kind of jollity.
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
Why, how now, Dromio! where runn'st thou so fast?
Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.
Gather the sequel by that went before.
Did call me brother.
Why pratest thou to thyself and answer'st not?
And as a bed I'll take them and there lie,
Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn.
with beating, I am waked with it when I sleep,
Exit
You would all this time have proved there is no
Where have you left the money that I gave you?
Tell her I am arrested in the street
I am sure you both of you remember me.
Are you there, wife? you might have come before.
They draw
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me:
ANTIPHOLUS
Do me the favour to dilate at full
Either consent to pay this sum for me
Will lose his beauty, yet the gold bides still,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
And now he's there, past thought of human reason.
Than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine.
Exeunt Second Merchant, Angelo, Officer, and Antipholus of Ephesus
To Angelo
A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,
I am an ass, I am a woman's man and besides myself.
A sin prevailing much in youthful men,
catch cold on's feet.
Sure ones, then.
Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
ANTIPHOLUS
But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear
Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.
Marry, so it doth appear
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,
Enter DUKE SOLINUS, AEGEON, Gaoler, Officers, and other Attendants
There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down
But ere they came,--O, let me say no more!
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
If any ship put out, then straight away.
We being strangers here, how darest thou trust
ANTIPHOLUS
'Tis so, I am an ass, else it could never be
Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not:
By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
Where Spain?
ANTIPHOLUS
behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you
What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
As could not be distinguish'd but by names.
I'll entertain the offer'd fallacy.
Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife:
That may with foul intrusion enter in
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard:
ANTIPHOLUS
Call thyself sister, sweet, for I am thee.
I am not furnish'd with the present money,
For servants must their masters' minds fulfil.
But this I think, there's no man is so vain
Or I attach you by this officer.
And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse
Hath almost made me traitor to myself:
A very reverent body, ay, such a one as a man may
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
But, lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,
No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
Far more, far more to you do I decline.
Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted,
Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
Are you a god? would you create me new?
That, undividable, incorporate,
A meaner woman was delivered
To go in person with me to my house.
Once did I get him bound and sent him home,
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in
I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.
Give her this key, and tell her, in the desk
You gave me none: you wrong me much to say so.
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
In her forehead, armed and reverted, making war
Belike you thought our love would last too long,
Peace, fool! thy master and his man are here,
A charitable duty of my order.
The passages of alleys, creeks and narrow lands,
Go home with it and please your wife withal,
There's none but witches do inhabit here,
And I'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
[Within]  Have at you with another, that's--When?
I will determine this before I stir.
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
Didst speak him fair?
O, know he is the bridle of your will.
I tell you, 'twill sound harshly in her ears.
If not, I'll leave him to the officer.
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
ANTIPHOLUS
very fear.
I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part,
To scorch your face and to disfigure you.
What claim lays she to thee?
Beating him
As from a bear a man would run for life,
ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near her.
Excludes all pity from our threatening looks.
Here's too much 'out upon thee!' I pray thee,
ANTIPHOLUS
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.
If you went in pain, master, this 'knave' would go sore.
Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner:
Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word:
Establish him in his true sense again,
Sir, sir, I will have law in Ephesus,
Thou hast no husband yet nor I no wife.
Keep then far league and truce with thy true bed,
Good master doctor, see him safe convey'd
On, officer, to prison till it come.
Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me.
Some blessed power deliver us from hence!
That's not my fault: he's master of my state:
A vulgar comment will be made of it,
How ill agrees it with your gravity
Then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness:
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead,
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.
can you tell?
Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is,
But, I protest, he had the chain of me,
Enter Second Merchant and ANGELO
Why, Dromio?
Quoth my master:
Exit
Makes me with thy strength to communicate:
But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale
Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
I am sure thou dost.
Enter a Courtezan
rope's-end.'
And so do I, yet did she call me so:
Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
Which being violently borne upon,
ANTIPHOLUS
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.
Second to none that lives here in the city:
And me they left with those of Epidamnum.
May he not do it by fine and recovery?
Re-enter LUCIANA with a purse
I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song.
We were encounterd by a mighty rock,
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt,
How if your husband start some other where?
What mean you, sir? for God's sake, hold your hands!
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
Good sir, say whether you'll answer me or no:
To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight:
ANTIPHOLUS
And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
[Within]  I thought to have asked you.
Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
And about evening come yourself alone
and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.
Say, is your tardy master now at hand?
Who, every word by all my wit being scann'd,
To a rope's-end, sir, and to that end am I returned.
Ay, that's my name.
SCENE I. Before the house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
Being strumpeted by thy contagion.
But I should know her as well as she knows me.
aspect to the hot breath of Spain, who sent whole
that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.
Marry, sir, she's the kitchen wench and all grease,
When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme
Stay, stand apart, I know not which is which.
Go get thee gone, fetch me an iron crow.
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,
I am not partial to infringe our laws:
Exit
A wretched soul, bruised with adversity,
Indued with intellectual sense and souls,
raised with it when I sit, driven out of doors with
Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embark'd?
Ay, but not enough.
But here's a villain that would face me down
Go hie thee presently, post to the road:
I'll say as they say and persever so,
When I desired him to come home to dinner,
Diet his sickness, for it is my office,
Marry, in her buttocks: I found it out by the bogs.
Here! go, the desk, the purse! sweet, now, make haste.
To drown me in thy sister's flood of tears:
You should for that have reprehended him.
ANTIPHOLUS
This chain which now you wear so openly:
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse:
Why call you me love? call my sister so.
Unquiet meals make ill digestions,
ANTIPHOLUS
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?
My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
And hurl the name of husband in my face
Exit
She that doth call me husband, even my soul
Shall I tell you why?
If any friend will pay the sum for him,
ANTIPHOLUS
I'll prove mine honour and mine honesty
ANTIPHOLUS
By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.
The hour steals on, I pray you, sir, dispatch.
How can she thus then call us by our names,
Why, first,--for flouting me, and then, wherefore--
Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
I long to know the truth hereof at large.
A sunny look of his would soon repair
Sleeping or waking? mad or well-advised?
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.
After his brother: and importuned me
nor reason?
ANTIPHOLUS
For if we too be one and thou play false,
not speak of without he say 'Sir-reverence.' I have
The fineness of the gold and chargeful fashion.
I never saw the chain, so help me Heaven!
By Dromio?
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!
Till I have used the approved means I have,
And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve,
Exit
For which, I hope, thou felt'st I was displeased.
Where England?
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
But here must end the story of my life,
I'll meet you at that place some hour hence.
Go to a gossips' feast and go with me,
I know it by their pale and deadly looks:
that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
To seek thy life by beneficial help:
O, soft, air! hold you still:
Avoid then, fiend! what tell'st thou me of supping?
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse
In food, in sport and life-preserving rest
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
She did betray me to my own reproof.
For lately we were bound, as you are now
It would make a man mad as a buck, to be so bought and sold.
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him,
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.
Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
Fie on thee, wretch! 'tis pity that thou livest
Villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt,
Revel and feast it at my house to-day,
Thou whoreson, senseless villain!
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst,
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from
[Within]  Let him walk from whence he came, lest he
Marry, and did, sir, namely, no time to recover hair
Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is:
I think you are all mated or stark mad.
To Adriana! that is where we dined,
As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace.
That in the ocean seeks another drop,
And Dromio, my man, did bring them me.
ANTIPHOLUS
morris-pike.
And at her heels a huge infectious troop
Thou shamest to acknowledge me in misery.
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
For urging it the second time to me.
And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner.
To do him all the grace and good I could.
Dromio, nor thou?
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear:
Then, gentle brother, get you in again,
can witness.
A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that
heats me with beating, when I am warm, he cools me
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
Where I will walk till thou return to me.
[Within]  What a coil is there, Dromio? who are those
ANTIPHOLUS
My wife is in a wayward mood to-day,
Enter a Servant
That he, unknown to me, should be in debt.
That hadst a wife once call'd AEmilia
Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
You hear how he importunes me,--the chain!
After so long grief, such festivity!
I should have chid you for not bringing it,
Why, so I did.
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.
Good signior, take the stranger to my house
In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus, DROMIO of Ephesus, ANGELO, and BALTHAZAR
It is no shame: the fellow finds his vein,
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof:
We in your motion turn and you may move us.
During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa:
I found it by the barrenness, hard in the palm of the hand.
As take from me thyself and not me too.
Faith, stay here this night, they will surely do us
There, take it, and much thanks for my good cheer.
Return'd so soon! rather approach'd too late:
Blows fair from land: they stay for nought at all
ANTIPHOLUS
My business cannot brook this dalliance.
Nay, forward, old man, do not break off so,
left arm, that I amazed ran from her as a witch:
And in his company that gentleman.
mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy
I the great toe! why the great toe?
Ere in our own house I do shade my head,
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
Whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you:
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't.
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
I send it through the rivers of your blood,
We charge you, that you have contrived to take
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand,
Whence comest thou? what wouldst thou? thy name?
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
With other muniments and petty helps
Your Rome about your ears.
Take this along, I writ it for thy sake
A noble wish.
He and Aufidius can no more atone
AEdiles, seize him!
Say, what's thy name?
He shall, sure on't.
Thanks. What's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our
They'll give him death by inches.
But what is like me formerly.
We are convented
That we shall hardly in our ages see
for him. Cotus!
So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are
Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.
The present consul, and last general
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
the love of Juno, let's go.
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
To thrust the lie unto him.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.
Ay, fool, is that a shame? Note but this fool.
with comforts,
The rabble should have first unroof'd the city,
This is a happier and more comely time
And follow to thine answer.
For corn at their own rates, whereof, they say,
It stands in like request?
And durst not once peep out.
is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!
Down with him, down with him!
Thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes
I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name
And vows revenge as spacious as between
They said they were an-hungry, sigh'd forth proverbs,
Of what we chance to sentence.
bencher in the Capitol.
And you the mutinous members, for examine
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts:
But with his last attempt he wiped it out,
I'll buy him of you.
The former agents, if they did complain,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
To do myself this wrong: till, at the last,
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?
What I can urge against him. Although it seems,
I am an officer of state, and come
And topping all others in boasting.
The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing
Enough, with over-measure.
The young'st and oldest thing.
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
No more words, we beseech you.
say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.
Envied against the people, seeking means
delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in
The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour
ACT II
We need not put new matter to his charge:
And with the deepest malice of the war
That, if you fail in our request, the blame
water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to
Let me speak:
That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours
Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not
Enter MENENIUS AGRIPPA
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Why speak'st not? speak, man: what's thy name?
'Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir
The Volsces dare break with us.
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
We may, sir, if we will.
Flourish
'I Pray, sir'--Plague upon't! I cannot bring
Thank you, sir: farewell.
I talk of you:
And not our streets with war!
How is it with our general?
If he be put upon 't, and that's as easy
Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes,
Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do,
Citizens steal away. Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS
If he were putting to my house the brand
'Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? what then?
The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The Conspirators draw, and kill CORIOLANUS: AUFIDIUS stands on his body
O, he is wounded, I thank the gods for't.
Help, ye citizens!
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords,
The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd
If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet,
Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you:
your misery increase with your age! I say to you,
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty
That does appear as he were flay'd? O gods
we are come off
If they set down before 's, for the remove
SCENE IV. Rome. A public place.
To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear,
I seem'd his follower, not partner, and
Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you
And to the battle came he, where he did
O, they are at it!
Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend
Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end,
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you
'Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to
Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general,
Sir, I cannot tell:
What do you prate of service?
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Kneels
We will be there before the stream o' the people,
What do ye talk?
Seal what I end withal! This double worship,
Bastards and all.
For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free
They say she's mad.
Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts
brave Titus:
Are you so brave? I'll have you talked with anon.
Be call'd your vanquisher.
The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune
Hath not that honour in't it had, for where
To make thee consul.
And here remain with your uncertainty!
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
For they do prank them in authority,
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
Bid them repair to the market place, where I,
But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship,
As certain as I know the sun is fire:
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars
Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee,
I think he'll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip
power that we have no power to do, for if he show us
Of the whole body: but, if you do remember,
Convenient numbers to make good the city,
A flourish with drums and trumpets. Exeunt
And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands
I'ld with thee every foot.
Enter a second Messenger
For truth to o'er-peer. Rather than fool it so,
You shout me forth
You shall know now that I am in estimation, you shall
and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
years' health, in which time I will make a lip at
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Murdering impossibility, to make
And you are darken'd in this action, sir,
Should they not,
Making not reservation of yourselves,
Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble,
man.
news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state,
Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather
For sinking under them.
I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.
They are not such as you.
That's a brave fellow, but he's vengeance proud, and
Note me this, good friend,
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
Then vail your ignorance, if none, awake
'Tis right.
To be set high in place, we did commend
Enter COMINIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, and other Senators, JUNIUS BRUTUS and SICINIUS VELUTUS
All hurt behind, backs red, and faces pale
For that he has,
O blessed heavens!
Exeunt
Exeunt
Thy country's strength and weakness,--thine own ways,
I have, 'tis ready.
Well, well, no more.
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,
What ever have been thought on in this state,
We call a nettle but a nettle and
A fault on us, your tribunes, that we laboured,
For what he did before Corioli, call him,
Re-enter MARCIUS, bleeding, assaulted by the enemy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us,
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up
His country's bowels out. And to poor we
Till he be dieted to my request,
are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
That should consume it, I have not the face
That most are willing. If any such be here--
'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes,
And keep their teeth clean.
Seducing so my friends, and, to this end,
He consul!
Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule
people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.
On, to the Capitol!
As they would hang them on the horns o' the moon,
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son--
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
I would they were barbarians--as they are,
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
If e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
Than camels in the war, who have their provand
and scatter'd,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
And still to nose the offence.
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.
Thou show'st a noble vessel: what's thy name?
Enter TITUS LARTIUS, with his power, from the pursuit
Making the mother, wife and child to see
Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum,
The noble house o' the Marcians, from whence came
Retires
Where's that?
Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome,
In whom already he's well graced, can not
No, Caius Marcius,
That won you without blows! Despising,
To call them woollen vassals, things created
Enter CORIOLANUS, marching with drum and colours, commoners being with him
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle,
And my pretext to strike at him admits
Their banners wave again.
In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder,
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world
The common muck of the world: he covets less
Enter MENENIUS with the two Tribunes of the people, SICINIUS and BRUTUS.
Shall bear the business in some other fight,
That ne'er did service for't: being press'd to the war,
Hear me, people, peace!
We stay here for the people.
To voice him consul: lay the fault on us.
SCENE VI. Antium. A public place.
out of the house: prithee, call my master to him.
I mean for your particular,--you had not
And I this.
Masters o' the people,
Opposing laws with strokes and here defying
many of us: that we did, we did for the best, and
And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: I request you
be many that they have loved, they know not
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
I loved the maid I married, never man
Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they
Very well:
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
Did shake down mellow fruit.
defender of them, and, in a violent popular
Enter the Lords of the city
having been supple and courteous to the people,
As I could pick my lance.
them plainly see't.
He holds her by the hand, silent
Alone I fought in your Corioli walls,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
I had rather be their servant in my way,
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Let's hence, and hear
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
Pray now, no more.
March on, my fellows:
And you.
Hang 'em! They say!
As therefore kept to do so.
First, the gods bless you for your tidings, next,
In praises sauced with lies.
Return to the tribunes.
Either you must
There was a yielding,--this admits no excuse.
With precepts that would make invincible
I dare be sworn you were:
O, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
Or wrath or craft may get him.
That we have bled together. Coriolanus
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go, lest
Hear nothing from him.
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
But since he hath
suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we
Only make trial what your love can do
tell you, and is almost mature for the violent
To give my poor host freedom.
Which men are best inclined.
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Coriolanus in Corioli?
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would
The town is ta'en!
With fame, a name to Caius Marcius, these
Exeunt
Real necessities, and give way the while
More than you doubt the change on't, that prefer
Read it not, noble lords,
As you were lesson'd, when he had no power,
it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be
Re-enter BRUTUS and SICINIUS, with the rabble
He still hath held them, that to's power he would
Faith, there had been many great men that have
And more a friend than e'er an enemy,
And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue,
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
greater soldier.
He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so!
Why force you this?
When what's not meet, but what must be, was law,
There was it:
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Will not have earth to know.
What are you?
He would not seem to know me.
And so are like to do.
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
so to heart the banishment of that worthy
too rough,
no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if
Mother, I am going to the market-place,
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
To ally my rages and revenges with
an into their estimation and report: but he hath so
please his mother and to be partly proud, which he
Certainly
Exeunt Citizens
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly,
Bear from hence his body,
What good condition can a treaty find
The happy man, whether defect of judgment,
it!
Here come more voices.
To extol what it hath done.
Let him be apprehended.
It was an answer: how apply you this?
Ay, but not mine own desire.
March to assault thy country than to tread--
Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Than thou hast spoken words?
wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' the war
battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for
Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels,
As you malign our senators for that
Pray you, be gone:
Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose
Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave.
Put them not to't:
SCENE II. Corioli. The Senate-house.
Enter two Officers, to lay cushions
With striving less to be so, lesser had been
My lord and husband!
Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast
Enter certain Romans, with spoils
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn,
Nay, go not from us thus.
Appear i' the market-place nor on him put
I'll bring him to you.
question asked him by any of the senators, but they
To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus,
You have stood your limitation, and the tribunes
Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise,
He that retires I'll take him for a Volsce,
man i' the world.
Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy,
won honour than in the embracements of his bed where
Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely
May say 'This mercy we have show'd,' the Romans,
This deserves death.
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
sufferance is a gain to them Let us revenge this with
He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest
To hide your doings, and to silence that,
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
You have made fair work!
bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.
Enter three or four Citizens
Have I had children's voices?
Or rudely visit them in parts remote,
will,'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but
This lady's husband here, this, do you see--
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
such things as you, I can scarce think there's any,
Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve
Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus:
Enter a troop of Citizens
And a petition granted them, a strange one--
Rebell'd against the belly, thus accused it:
How shall this bisson multitude digest
I would they were abed!
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
man's voice.
Most willingly,
The people's enemy is gone, is gone!
The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy
Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one,
One that speaks thus their voice?
Speak that,--
Nor ever will be ruled.
Slain, sir, doubtless.
The Volsces have much corn, take these rats thither
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
That's lesser than a little.
Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
And by his rare example made the coward
Have you
Which we will second. When he lies along,
Corioli like a planet: now all's his:
Enter AUFIDIUS and his Lieutenant
Nay, it's no matter for that.
Exeunt
And by my body's action teach my mind
The man is noble and his fame folds-in
He used us scornfully: he should have show'd us
our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is
Mark you this, people?
Pushes him away
Exeunt CORIOLANUS, COMINIUS, and others
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
I pray you, daughter, sing, or express yourself in a
Live, and thrive!
him like a carbon ado.
The gods grant them true!
But, as I say, such as become a soldier,
reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,
spectatorship, and crueller in suffering, behold now
Though not for Rome itself.
Of Marcius?
What more fearful?
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
That envied his receipt, even so most fitly
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A better witness back than words, which we,
With giving him glory.
For I have ever verified my friends,
Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes
day's journey.
Or let us stand to our authority,
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it,
To enter our Rome gates: i' the people's name,
pinched with the colic, you make faces like
Music within. Enter a Servingman
So, here comes a brace.
They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O!
SCENE VII. The gates of Corioli.
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Sir, I hope
Sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house:
With only suffering stain by him, for him
A brand to the end o' the world.
Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
Noble Marcius!
Wine, wine, wine! What service
I have sat too long.
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
Which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on, my fellows:
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Well, sir.
And saving those that eye thee!
Like interrupted waters and o'erbear
Noble lady!
The one by the other.
O, you have made good work!
And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria!
Enter a Messenger
Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,
upon too trivial motion, one that converses more
Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess,
Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,
That turns their countenances.
Enter MARCIUS
You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but
What must I say?
of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he
He has our voices, sir.
His own impatience
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition!
I kneel before thee, and unproperly
For a short holding: if we lose the field,
To BRUTUS
They lie in view, but have not spoke as yet.
Indeed I would be consul.
Ay, to devour him, as the hungry plebeians would the
Whene'er we come to our account.
Shall touch the people--which time shall not want,
Draw near, ye people.
Go see this rumourer whipp'd. It cannot be
But by your voices, will not so permit me,
The multitudinous tongue, let them not lick
The warlike service he has done, consider, think
Exeunt
That he will give them make I as little question
And make my wars on you: look to't: come on,
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do't:
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves
I have been consul, and can show for Rome
That being pass'd for consul with full voice,
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
I would have had you put your power well on,
head, that he gives entrance to such companions?
Of their best trust, o'er them Aufidius,
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Rather than envy you.
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
Nay, let them follow:
'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he,
About their functions friendly.
The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
Nay,'tis true.
fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his
That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son,
Amongst your cloven army.
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Be thus to them.
Indeed, you shall not.
yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown
him manifests the true knowledge he has in their
While I remain above the ground, you shall
At Antium lives he?
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
More worthier than their voices. They know the corn
Call thither all the officers o' the town,
alike and none less dear than thine and my good
Farewell.
Make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees,
Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,
Against a falling fabric. Will you hence,
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
my son.' 'My daughter.' 'He killed my cousin
He flouted us downright.
Having determined of the Volsces and
Enter, with drum and colours, MARCIUS, TITUS  LARTIUS, Captains and Soldiers. To them a Messenger
Whether for east or west: the dearth is great,
Yes, certain, there's a letter for you, I saw't.
at home that will not
The dust on antique time would lie unswept,
You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have
Masters, lay down your weapons.
There hath been in Rome strange insurrections, the
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
From me do back receive the flour of all,
I know thee not: thy name?
O Marcius, Marcius!
The slave's report is seconded, and more,
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
Exeunt
Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
To meet anon, upon your approbation.
This, here before you.
Hear me speak:
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch:
You had more beard when I last saw you, but your
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery.
The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers,
A little of that worthy work perform'd
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
Mark'd you his lip and eyes?
your eyes so fast?
Thou art poor'st of all, then shortly art thou mine.
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
him last night.
displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he
Hold, hold, hold, hold!
I never saw the like.
But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him,
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
And thus far having stretch'd it--here be with them--
by threes. He's to make his requests by
On both sides more respect.
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his
And we their hands.
Be not as common fools, if you are not,
I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I
Condemning some to death, and some to exile,
Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them,
hard for him, I have heard him say so himself.
And bring thy news so late?
Commands me name myself.
They have ta'en note of us: keep on your way.
He shall well know
dull tribunes,
A sea and land full. You have pray'd well to-day:
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
With thee awhile: determine on some course,
This is most likely!
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
The one part suffer'd, the other will I do.
This last old man,
He had rather venture all his limbs for honour
In mine own person, holp to reap the fame
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
approbation.
No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.
In this our fabric, if that they--
Exeunt
And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt
As Hercules
'Tis this slave,--
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
When corn was given them gratis, you repined,
That starts i' the way before thee.
[Within]                 Come I too late?
'Peace, peace, peace!' 'Stay, hold, peace!'
Than the severity of the public power
What, what, what!
could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks,
wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?
good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater
Let's be calm.
A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it,
Marcus.' 'He killed my father.'
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself,
Set down by the poll?
solemness out o' door. and go along with us.
The best, with whom we may articulate,
Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice
Thou art my warrior,
First, hear me speak.
Thy news?
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.
Before the common distribution, at
Well, then, farewell.
Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
Yet one time he did call me by my name:
Which he so sets at nought.
By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom
I do beseech you,
Retires
Thou shouldst not scape me here.
Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved
Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.
your worships: more of your conversation would
How! no more!
A curse begin at very root on's heart,
Alarum continues
How lies their battle? know you on which side
My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and
Where they shall know our mind: away!
He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two
Flourish of cornets. Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS
Down with him! down with him!
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are
Away!
breaking out.
With every minute you do change a mind,
Have you inform'd them sithence?
One fire drives out one fire, one nail, one nail,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men,
To your remembrances: but you have found,
Exit
His name unparallel'd, haply amplified,
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.
Of that integrity which should become't,
The bristled lips before him: be bestrid
You, the great toe of this assembly?
Enter a Citizen
Resolved. resolved.
With them he enters, who, upon the sudden,
Destroy what lies before 'em.
Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join
Wrench up thy power to the highest.
What lay before them.
Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes,
I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other,
execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn
By Jove, 'twould be my mind!
As you have been, that's for my country:
Go not home.
How now, my masters! have you chose this man?
as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.
Is this done?
Go about it.
The theme of our assembly.
Enter the army of the Volsces
Enter CORIOLANUS, VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, MENENIUS, COMINIUS, with the young Nobility of Rome
Go, get you to your house, be gone, away!
Mine own desert.
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.
Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion--
In aught he merit not.
'Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear,
You?
The leading of thine own revenges, take
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid
Enter a Roman and a Volsce, meeting
Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire
[To COMINIUS]                Lead you on.
[To VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA]  Your hand, and yours:
You should have ta'en the advantage of his choler
SCENE IX. The Roman camp.
The Ladies make signs to CORIOLANUS
I'll try whether my old wit be in request
Well, no more.
Here is the steed, we the caparison:
Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS
Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones
Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot
Breaking his oath and resolution like
Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this?
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
Well, well, we'll leave you.
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
Are enter'd in the Roman territories,
The very way to catch them.
Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me
I have not deserved it.
But I fear
That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
As if a man were author of himself
In acclamations hyperbolical,
A noise within
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
Peace, peace, be not so loud.
If you do hold the same intent wherein
'Though all at once cannot
A shout within
Was ne'er distributed.
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
established against the rich, and provide more
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
More noble blows than ever thou wise words,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
I know it,
How youngly he began to serve his country,
Who is the sink o' the body,--
You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate
Which I can scarcely bear.
good voice, sir, what say you?
Who thrives and who declines, side factions
Faith, we hear fearful news.
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes,
Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon
You see how he intends to use the people.
That common chances common men could bear,
After the inveterate hate he bears you.
Wherein you see me smear'd, if any fear
Say, has our general met the enemy?
And live you yet?
My hazards still have been your solace: and
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd:
Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.
'That I receive the general food at first,
To a mother's part belongs. He turns away:
Enter MENENIUS, COMINIUS, SICINIUS, BRUTUS, and others
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's
And temperately proceed to what you would
As if I loved my little should be dieted
you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius,
his eye, talks like a knell, and his hum is a
To the Capitol, come:
Choler!
That do corrupt my air, I banish you,
Under your great command. You are to know
who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors
Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows,
I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip
God save your good worships! Marcius is coming
This is unlikely:
Where's Caius Marcius?
A trembling upon Rome, such as was never
cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller,
To gratify his noble service that
SCENE X. The camp of the Volsces.
What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes,
SCENE I. Rome. A street.
Ay, traitor, Marcius!
No public benefit which you receive
And power, unto itself most commendable,
conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be
Great cause to give great thanks.
Thus violently redress.
he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither
That always favour'd him.
For mercy to his country. Therefore, let's hence,
A most royal one, the centurions and their charges,
Enforce the present execution
But once a-day, it would unclog my heart
man, I think, that shall set them in present action.
With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high
In thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in
Nor cheque my courage for what they can give,
To say 'Beseech you, cease.' You have made fair hands,
Do't! he will do't, for, look you, sir, he has as
Hail sir!
On safe-guard he  came to me, and did curse
Before-time seen him thus.
Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.
Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but
He's a disease that must be cut away.
him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,--I
Your enemies and his find something in him.
Forgive my tyranny, but do not say
Upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended,
Of their own choice: one's Junius Brutus,
Farewell.
Dismiss them home.
No, good madam, I will not out of doors.
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
Exeunt CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS. The two Servingmen come forward
He has it now, and by his looks methink
corner-stone?
You may not pass, you must return: our general
they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for
Should say 'Be good to Rome,' they charged him even
behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you
A man of their infirmity.
ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
He has no equal.
Exit
Exeunt
country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
From the noise of our own drums.'
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
to be glad of yours.
He sent in writing after me, what he would not,
Against the rectorship of judgment?
Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us,
We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a
have strong arms too.
And keep your honours safe!
Caius Marcius.
I' the city of kites and crows.
They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
Peace, both, and hear me speak.
At thy choice, then:
Some harlot's spirit! my throat of war be turn'd,
Thou hast years upon thee, and thou art too full
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?
The people's magistrates.
Where is your ancient courage? you were used
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do,
and to be on foot at an hour's warning.
Exit AEdile
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Were to us all, that do't and suffer it,
Tell me of corn!
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges,
Against all noble sufferance.
For them! I cannot do it to the gods,
Return me, as Cominius is return'd,
Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.
You have made good work,
Believe't not lightly--though I go alone,
Ere now denied the asker? and now again
Spoke he of me?
Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd
But mantled in your own.
Why, 'tis no great matter, for a very little thief of
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
I must have leave to pass.
I love them as they weigh.
With those that have but little: this must be patch'd
Repair to the Capitol.
Served well for Rome,--
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin, let
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance
condition of a man!
To the people, not by your own instruction,
Then his good report should have been my son, I
Wherein thou seest me mask'd, for thy revenge
Must have their voices, neither will they bate
Here, sir: I'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for
Have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow,
Do they still fly to the Roman?
I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits,
false report of him.
The noble tribunes are the people's mouths,
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
With hearts more proof than shields. Advance,
That pages blush'd at him and men of heart
Not possible.
You are most welcome home.
strange things from Rome, all tending to the good of
A place below the first: for what miscarries
Exeunt Citizens
censured here in the city, I mean of us o' the
There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might
Know, good mother,
Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates,
Patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
Verily, I do not jest with you, there came news from
Makes you think so.
I crave their pardons:
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
This enemy town. I'll enter: if he slay me,
On whom depending, their obedience fails
The one half of my commission, and set down--
If you'll bestow a small--of what you have little--
Thy exercise hath been too violent for
sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love
Requite your love!
Speak, speak.
The one side must have bale.
As you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit
Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.
Marcius coming home!
Come, come.
Away! get you away.
My country's good with a respect more tender,
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
A sure destruction.
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
This but done,
Reports, the Volsces with two several powers
fronts encountering,
I am glad to see your ladyship.
If they be senators: and they are no less,
And leave me but the bran.' What say you to't?
Made all of false-faced soothing!
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.
I would he had continued to his country
Their very heart of hope.
His marks of merit, wounds received for's country.
Even so
God-den to you all, god-den to you all.
They would not thread the gates. This kind of service
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Repent in their election.
petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawn'd
At Antium.
Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions:
'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Well, and say that Marcius
For one poor grain or two!
But with such words that are but rooted in
No, no, no man saw 'em.
A place of potency and sway o' the state,
Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
Prithee now,
You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.
Flourish. Cornets. Exeunt in state, as before. BRUTUS and SICINIUS come forward
Call Coriolanus.
To say he'll turn your current in a ditch,
In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two
Which you do live upon, and fit it is,
favouring the first complaint, hasty and tinder-like
With cautelous baits and practise.
drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a
From twelve to seventy, and pouring war
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
As often as we eat. By the elements,
Take your commission, hie you to your bands:
Where is he wounded?
The worthiest men have done't?
He cried to me, I saw him prisoner,
For that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest,
Let's not meet her.
Shouting their emulation.
Tell not me:
Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Re-enter AEdile, with Citizens
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
My revenge properly, my remission lies
True,
I know you can do very little alone, for your helps
Go, call the people:
Upon the part o' the people, in whose power
SCENE V. Corioli. A street.
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
Had borne the business!'
May I change these garments?
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
What's the matter?
What you have done--before our army hear me.
Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace,
O, no, no, no.
Exeunt
His nature is too noble for the world:
Enter COMINIUS, as it were in retire, with soldiers
Say not we brought it.
we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.
wipe their lips.
So it must fall out
As he hath spices of them all, not all,
Here's he that would take from you all your power.
For which you are a traitor to the people.
bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not
Re-enter third Servingman
What's in his heart, and that is there which looks
I'll fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
I have seen and heard of, for your voices have
By lack of stooping,--
Exeunt
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
Nay, but speak not maliciously.
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour,
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
If he should still malignantly remain
Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy
And look'd upon things precious as they were
With manacles thorough our streets, or else
He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thus
And suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be
Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter,
Two Sentinels on guard.
In bolted language, meal and bran together
for consulships?
Call't not a plot:
The extreme dangers and the drops of blood
Exeunt
Shed for my thankless country are requited
Noble Aufidius,
Re-enter the first Servingman
If I could shake off but one seven years
Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
He did solicit you in free contempt
He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse,
Say no more:
sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering
Will not you go?
All places yield to him ere he sits down,
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic
Enter COMINIUS
ACT I
'I would he had'! 'Twas you incensed the rabble:
Our business is not unknown to the senate, they have
The general is my lover: I have been
Come, enough.
No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said
Be gone,
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
In this mutiny, the Tribunes, the AEdiles, and the People, are beat in
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
What makes this change?
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp,
Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.
Be taken from the people.
O mother, mother!
He hath hereto prized them at.
comes, and again, catched it again, or whether his
'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Of my success.
Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil
Our tradesmen with in their shops and going
There is a world elsewhere.
More cruel to your good report than grateful
Of what is past.
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
If not most mortal to him. But, let it come.
broiled and eaten him too.
What they are used to bear.
But with them change of honours.
Enter CORIOLANUS in mean apparel, disguised and muffled
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not--'Sdeath!
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
As traitors do.
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.
'Shall'!
Fie, fie, fie!
Worthy tribunes,
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
Our comfort in the country. We must find
Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship?
Nay, temperately, your promise.
business, and I will merrily accompany you home.
Exeunt
To have't with saying 'Good morrow.'
You had not show'd them how ye were disposed
You have, I know, petition'd all the gods
Be-mock the modest moon.
Exeunt
Besides, if things go well,
Go, masters, get you home, be not dismay'd:
support usurers, repeal daily any wholesome act
To VALERIA
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy,
One word more, one word.
Exeunt Citizens
O good but most unwise patricians! why,
our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I
Who, my master?
I know you well, sir, and you know
country's friend,
Lead'st first to win some vantage.
And witness of the malice and displeasure
At some time when his soaring insolence
By calmness or by absence: all's in anger.
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him
Coin words till their decay against those measles,
Exit
Upon our territories, and have already
What, what? his choler?
Upon my party, I'ld revolt to make
Trust to't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb,
But tell the traitor, in the high'st degree
Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not
Pray, let us go.
Accept my thankfulness.
With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
That I may pass this doing.
That's my brave boy!
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
The people are abused, set on. This paltering
Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs,
This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it
You are at point to lose your liberties:
O'erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took
From Rome all season'd office and to wind
Let him alone,
with him, if thou standest not i' the state of
Your enigma?
Thy tears are salter than a younger man's,
Tarquin seven hurts i' the body.
And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me.
I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished
Condition!
What I have written to you?
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man
What's the news? what's the news?
I mean, thy general.
You'll speak with Coriolanus.
disturbing the lords within.
Your Coriolanus
Scratches with briers,
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
Senators,  and C	We'll surety him.
Masters of the people,
Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth
Ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time
finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.
parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
The gods forbid!
A good demand.
trencher, hence!
Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Anon do meet the senate.
I know, they do attend us.
to find you out there: you have well saved me a
You might have been enough the man you are,
son the whole name of the war: he hath in this
To curb the will of the nobility:
What faults he made before the last, I think
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
than now in first seeing he had proved himself a
Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.
I say it shall be so.
That thought them sure of you.
opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and
Our swifter composition.
on the voice of occupation and
You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you
You shames of Rome! you herd of--Boils and plagues
Make the sun dance. Hark you!
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
Endue you with the people's voice: remains
Come, come, let's see him out at gates, come.
Coriolanus banished!
We have ever your good word.
As cause will be obey'd. Please you to march,
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Now, this no more dishonours you at all
Put him to choler straight: he hath been used
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you,
One time will owe another.
And cannot lose your way.
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost--
Ay.
These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he
Get you gone.
Let him die for't.
And were I any thing but what I am,
A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius
moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before
And affecting one sole throne,
Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?
Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Who did hoot him out o' the city.
And show no sign of fear.
With us to break his neck.
Most welcome!
Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS and certain Senators
He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen,
Make yourselves scabs?
And power i' the truth o' the cause.
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But
Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!
Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves,
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him.
Your husband so much sweat. Cominius,
He loves your people
Not having the power to do the good it would,
are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.
You guard like men, 'tis well: but, by your leave,
Than what you should, made you against the grain
As thou hast power and person.
To know, when two authorities are up,
Are servanted to others: though I owe
That all but we enjoy, for how can we,
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
Where is he? call him hither.
So, to our tent,
To us that give you truly: by your patience,
Of our great action: therefore shall he die,
Our Rome will cast upon thee.
I cannot help it now,
Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
tell you you have good faces. If you see this in
Might stop our countryman.
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
any in Rome.
And bear him to the rock.
will serve, for once we stood up about the corn, he
A most inherent baseness.
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.
Than violentest contrariety.
intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with
[To SICINIUS]  You shall stay too: I would I had the power
Enter VOLUMNIA
These three lead on this preparation
Enter CORIOLANUS
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears
Presented to my knife his throat: I took him,
Destroy'd his country, and his name remains
You have said you will not grant us any thing,
Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd,
To help Cominius.
Exit
flattered the people, who ne'er loved them, and there
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
Would buy this for a lie!
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Exeunt CORIOLANUS, COMINIUS, MENENIUS, Senators, and Patricians
Their liberties, make them of no more voice
Than are upon you yet.
Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul,
two tribunes:
The word is 'mildly.' Pray you, let us go:
No, I serve not thy master.
Cast your election on him.
I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for
Or Jove for's power to thunder. His heart's his mouth:
For I dare so far free him--made him fear'd,
Of general ignorance,--it must omit
So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties,
I shall inform them.
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
you, deliver.
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent
the middle and but one half of what he was
Good news, good news, the ladies have prevail'd,
and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a
Very well, and could be content to give him good
The value of her own: 'twere a concealment
It is your former promise.
I may be consul.
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
And pass'd him unelected.
Thy friend no less
To undercrest your good addition
For certain drops of salt, your city Rome,
One thus descended,
SCENE II. The same. A  street near the gate.
O, well begg'd!
That they combine not there.
I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon
Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Ay, 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thy
To stale 't a little more.
That made the air unwholesome, when you cast
Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place,
thing hereafter.
My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase,
The people cry you mock'd them, and of late,
I could beat forty of them.
Will you be gone?
Should be in them to give.
Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence
'Sicinius!' 'Brutus!' 'Coriolanus!' 'Citizens!'
The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap
Ye re goodly things, you voices!
That I'll straight do, and, knowing myself again,
that's no matter, the greater part carries it. I
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
Exit AEdile
Re-enter MENENIUS, with BRUTUS and SICINIUS
Ha!
The gods preserve you both!
O the gods!
estimation of them, 'tis a condition they account
The tribunes are no soldiers, and their people
I wish no better
When one but of my ordinance stood up
We shall be blest to do, if he remember
Bid them wash their faces
When he might act the woman in the scene,
Their mercy at the price of one fair word,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues
A noble fellow, I warrant him.
Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no,
For my prosperity!
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i'
No more talking on't, let it be done: away, away!
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
In this so never-needed help, yet do not
He proved best man i' the field, and for his meed
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto
And with his charity slain.
SCENE III. The tent of Coriolanus.
I talk of that, that know it.
Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid
See, they have shut him in.
I would dissemble with my nature where
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.
It honour'd him.
Wherefore? wherefore?
ACT V
I would the gods had nothing else to do
With shunless destiny, aidless came off,
His remedies are tame i' the present peace
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
To keep your great pretences veil'd till when
To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
Another alarum. The Volsces fly, and MARCIUS follows them to the gates
In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate
Indeed, madam?
Assemble presently the people hither,
I am weary, yea, my memory is tired.
and a heaven to throne in.
Which they have given to beggars.
We met here both to thank and to remember
'Twixt you there's difference, but the fall of either
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
One word, good citizens.
How? what?
How accompanied?
And sack great Rome with Romans.
O my sweet lady, pardon.
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
Only in strokes, but, with thy grim looks and
nine that I know.
We do, sir, tell us what hath brought you to't.
Why do you say 'thwack our general '?
That will not hold the handling: or say to them,
Now, pray, sir, get you gone:
To the people, beg their stinking breaths.
mistress. Thou pratest, and pratest, serve with thy
is, even till the altitude of his virtue.
I have lived
Hark you. far off!
Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth,
This was my speech, and I will speak't again--
To hear my nothings monster'd.
Come, sir, along with us.
Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's
I tell thee, fellow,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore, be it known,
By the consent of all, we were establish'd
Kneels
TITUS LARTIUS, having set a guard upon  Corioli, going with drum and trumpet toward  COMINIUS and CAIUS MARCIUS, enters with Lieutenant, other Soldiers, and a Scout
Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!
Farewell, farewell.
he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
Shouting, and throwing up their caps
Ever right.
dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled
Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,
Marcius, his name?
Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you:
The horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit
To the greater bench: in a rebellion,
butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!
To answer all the city.
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,
Let me desire your company: he must come,
Of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot
Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver,
Half an hour since brought my report.
Both field and city ours, he never stood
Come, come, we'll prompt you.
Here comes his mother.
but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and
him.
The god of soldiers,
Better be held nor more attain'd than by
Which easily endures not article
plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
That, in the official marks invested, you
Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment,
I' the plain way of his merit.
True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way
The general suit of Rome, never admitted
Your fellow tribune.
This mutiny were better put in hazard,
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw,
Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS, and COMINIUS, with Senators and Patricians
greatness back?
Which we devise him.
Unless, by using means, I lame the foot
Thou hast not done before.
Let them hang.
Stand fast,
See you yond coign o' the Capitol, yond
Exeunt
SCENE VII. A camp, at a small distance from Rome.
Self-loving,--
There is Aufidius, list, what work he makes
What, art thou stiff? stand'st out?
Tush, tush!
Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers, I'll be one.
SCENE V. The same. A hall in Aufidius's house.
Why, so he did, I am sure.
Exit
They've not prepared for us.
Tying him to aught, so putting him to rage,
though I must be content to bear with those that say
Ye're long about it.
Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds:
What has he done to Rome that's worthy death?
Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming,
Rather our state's defective for requital
And then I'll speak a little.
Which he was lord of, or whether nature,
for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.
Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that:
Commit the war of white and damask in
What is thy name?
Regard me as I do not flatter, and
I think not so.
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls,
Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see
You have deserved nobly of your country, and you
Thinking upon his services, took from you
Enter VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA	they set them down on two low stools, and sew
Flourish. Alarum. A retreat is sounded. Flourish.  Enter, from one side, COMINIUS with the Romans, from the other side, MARCIUS, with his arm in a scarf
The present wars devour him: he is grown
And the buildings of my fancy: only
That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
Will answer in mine honour.
That thought he could do more, a very little
Therefore, at your vantage,
To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares,
I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery?
So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit,
Let them assemble,
Makes the survivor heir of all.
our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set
ye're so slight. He that hath a will to die by
cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack-
In truth, la, go with me, and I'll tell you
Lo, citizens, he says he is content:
war I sent him, from whence he returned, his brows
I beseech you, peace:
fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold
Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces
Does reason our petition with more strength
Sit, Coriolanus, never shame to hear
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Wednesday half an hour together: has such a
Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen--your son
Fie, fie, fie!
I was moved withal.
Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall
Have you collected them by tribes?
He has the stamp of Marcius, and I have
I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you, and pray you,
Against my canker'd country with the spleen
And tried his inclination, from him pluck'd
They fear us not, but issue forth their city.
Exeunt
cannot tell how to term it.
I had been mercenary.
Here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his
creeping thing.
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
But this is something odd.
When we shall hap to give 't them.
The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the
We are all undone, unless
Not to them all.
A murrain on't! I took this for silver.
Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you
Our certain death: therefore it is decreed
You may, sir.
Scars to move laughter only.
The charges of the action. We have made peace
By deed-achieving honour newly named,--
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
And grieve to hear't.
You make strong party, or defend yourself
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother,
Retire to win our purpose.
An o'er-press'd Roman and i' the consul's view
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!
That in these several places of the city
and their consent of one direct way should be at
hanging, or of some death more long in
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.
To yield your voices?
Ha! Marcius coming home!
The common file--a plague! tribunes for them!--
him.
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter--
Fare you well.
threshold till my lord return from the wars.
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list
Their bands i' the vaward are the Antiates,
Pray, be counsell'd:
Drawing his sword
Hence, old goat!
It shall be so, it shall be so, let him away:
Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!
To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius,
The senate's courtesy? Let deeds express
Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,
Drums afar off
SCENE V. The same. A street near the gate.
Say, you ne'er had done't--
We cannot, sir, we are undone already.
Manifest treason!
Our wish, which side should win: for either thou
An 'twere to give again,--but 'tis no matter.
'Twere well
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?
Enter seven or eight Citizens
As you have done, that's what I can, induced
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request
Consider this: he has been bred i' the wars
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air,
I do not like this news.
My tongue to such a pace:--'Look, sir, my wounds!
It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches
with the buttock of the night than with the forehead
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?
customary gown.
content to say it was for his country he did it to
Learn how 'tis held, and what they are that must
May they perceive's intent! He will require them,
We hate alike:
Come, lay aside your stitchery, I must have you play
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Nay, my good soldier, up,
The which shall turn you to no further harm
You were conducted to a gentle bath
My words disbench'd you not.
'Fore your own eyes and ears?
Standing your friendly lord.
He must, and will
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
More learned than the ears--waving thy head,
Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if
How far off lie these armies?
Merely awry: when he did love his country,
Ithaca full of moths. Come, I would your cambric
And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what, yet go:
Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and VALERIA
They are dissolved: hang 'em!
gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is
Allow their officers and are content
And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,
ACT III
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:--
The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves,
Enter VALERIA, with an Usher and Gentlewoman
Exit Citizen
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
poor with begging.
To say so to my husband.
Hath brought me to thy hearth, not out of hope--
The same you are not, which, for your best ends,
many friends as enemies, which friends, sir, as it
He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth
are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous
Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs
Why, this was known before.
Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife
He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery,
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
SCENE I. Rome. A public place.
Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger
were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as
in the hatching,
Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
I' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either
Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their
Mortal, to cut it off, to cure it, easy.
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight,
Farewell, kind neighbours: we wish'd Coriolanus
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep.
And hale him up and down, all swearing, if
As those should do that had deserved his hate,
I have been i' the market-place, and, sir,'tis fit
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
Will bear the knave by the volume. The honour'd gods
Spread further.
Why stay we to be baited
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
And, being angry, does forget that ever
The senators and patricians love him too:
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
If it be honour in your wars to seem
In peril of precipitation
The noble man have mercy.
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves
Because you talk of pride now,--will you not be angry?
Pray, be content:
Lesser his person than an ill report,
You know the cause, air, of my standing here.
And made what work I pleased: 'tis not my blood
The noble knot he made.
What news? what news?
Which he did end all his, and took some pride
Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother
Did follow to his urn.
It will be dangerous to go on: no further.
thy honour
Now we have shown our power,
Your sued-for tongues?
As I do know the consul's worthiness,
true purchasing.
Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you
You keep a constant temper.
No, nor a man that fears you less than he,
were she earthly, no nobler,--whither do you follow
At a crack'd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons,
Show'd mastership in floating, fortune's blows,
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Go we to our tent:
And know how we proceed.
And knew no other kin.
Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults
I' the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius,
the people.
The blood I drop is rather physical
And  [Censorinus,]  nobly named so,
the idle husewife with me this afternoon.
Trumpets, hautboys, drums beat, all together
O noble fellow!
Your native town you enter'd like a post,
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
How! traitor!
What, will he come?
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but
Who am prepared against your territories,
Worthy Cominius, speak.
When we were chosen tribunes for the people,--
that's in them. Is the senate possessed of this?
Our spoils he kick'd at,
By the blood we have shed together, by the vows
The city is well stored.
Tyrannical power: if he evade us there,
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Be it so, go back: the virtue of your name
And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle:
And his old hate unto you, besides, forget not
And help the joy.
I'll go to him, and undertake to bring him
the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill
Insolent villain!
and heir to Mars, set at upper end o' the table, no
Till one can do no more.
Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow,
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
Or butchers killing flies.
False to my nature? Rather say I play
Lay hands upon him.
will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.
He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last,
Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart,
To purge herself with words: dispatch.
Inclinable to honour and advance
SCENE VI. Near the camp of Cominius.
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear,
Well, I'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to
melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
And make your channel his? If he have power
You take it off again?
This is strange.
All the contagion of the south light on you,
To VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA,  and c
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
'Tis he,'tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.
Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
We know your drift: speak what?
report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.
More than his singularity, he goes
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands,
Do more than counterpoise a full third part
stand for his place. He received in the repulse of
Should now eat up her own!
the utmost of your having: back.
prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true,
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
What's like to be their words: 'we did request it,
The Volsces are in arms.
Your colder reasons.
Come:
To ease his breast with panting.
Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out
and make but an interior survey of your good selves!
In heaps and piles of ruin.
In wholesome manner.
Show them the unaching scars which I should hide,
Enter MENENIUS and SICINIUS
And let me use my sword, I'll make a quarry
Nor yoke with him for tribune.
Hadst thou beheld--
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him,
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
We know't, we know't.
Seize him, AEdiles!
The nobles in great earnestness are going
Would think upon you for your voices and
To-morrow, to-day, presently, you shall have the
sighs, and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy
As for my country I have shed my blood,
We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy
And the gods doom him after!
Which they have often made against the senate,
Cleave in the midst, and perish.
Enters the gates
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
I do not say 'thwack our general,' but he was always
In that there's comfort.
Are mock'd for valiant ignorance,
doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Go, get you home, you fragments!
way home again.
I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you--
The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes,
Anger's my meat, I sup upon myself,
At a poor man's house, he used me kindly:
teeth and tear it, O, I warrant it, how he mammocked
Worthy voices!
O, true-bred!
Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and
Hail to you both!
O heavens! O heavens!
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
In your condemned seconds.
In puny battle slay me.
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
But we will drink together, and you shall bear
I could myself
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Ere stay behind this business.
As if Olympus to a molehill should
excellent news of your husband.
Upon's again.
Nay! prithee, woman,--
I have deserved no better entertainment,
Droop not, adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother:
No more of him, he is a worthy man: make way, they
Are  you mankind?
The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Your voices: for your voices I have fought,
Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
being proud?
Speak, good Cominius:
And carry with us ears and eyes for the time,
As you threw caps up will he tumble down,
Enter MARCIUS and TITUS LARTIUS with a trumpet
And make bold power look pale--they threw their caps
Exeunt
Should know we were afoot.
Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Proceed by process,
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
it was against our will.
You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all
Here's goodly work!
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
Shall remain!
you.
Prosperity be thy page!
He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his
There's no remedy,
Under the canopy!
Call our cares fears, which will in time
In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans,
Repent what you have spoke.
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em
Exeunt
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Our army's in the field
We have record that very well it can,
Alone I did it. Boy!
To answer us.
Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and MENENIUS
With cloth of any colour.
This, as you say, suggested
Where he shall answer, by a lawful form,
Give me excuse, good madam, I will obey you in every
ingrateful injury, to report otherwise, were a
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep
True! pow, wow.
access to thee.
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
How not your own desire?
My friends of noble touch, when I am forth,
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
Mine arms about that body, where against
Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business
You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your news?--
Marcius would have all from you, Marcius,
SCENE IV. Antium. Before Aufidius's house.
You shall not be
Yourself into a power tyrannical,
Exeunt
Of shame seen through thy country, speed
I shall be loved when I am lack'd. Nay, mother.
He had so, looking as it were--would I were hanged,
BRUTUS and SICINIUS go aside
Even from this instant, banish him our city,
For what before it was.
Therefore lay hold of him,
for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.
We have been called so of many, not that our heads
Exeunt
A sennet. Trumpets sound. Enter COMINIUS the  general, and TITUS LARTIUS, between them, CORIOLANUS,  crowned with an oaken garland, with Captains and Soldiers, and a Herald
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
Thou'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors:
once to all the points o' the compass.
Enter a third Servingman. The first meets him
Well, well, sir, well.
Exit MARCIUS
Ay, but mildly.
have not in abundance?
If you submit you to the people's voices,
But to be rough, unswayable and free.
Your company to the Capitol, where, I know,
Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator,
In human action and capacity,
They all shout and wave their swords, take him up in their arms, and cast up their caps
Which, without note, here's many else have done,--
'Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we call'd
Let them puff all about mine ears, present me
Good faith, I'll prove him,
Name not the god, thou boy of tears!
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
with the oaken garland.
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me,
always factionary on the party of your general.
And only hitherward. I leave your honours.
He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than
Do you hear?
Let them accuse me by invention, I
That valour is the chiefest virtue, and
Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!
Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceed
What is the city but the people?
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Too modest are you,
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do,
Unmuffling
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
In a most dear particular. He call'd me father:
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
Almost at point to enter.
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
With variable complexions, all agreeing
Nay. but his taunts.
As draw his sword, yet he hath left undone
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my
You are a Roman, are you?
I would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite,
Enter to them, MENENIUS
when he shall come to his account, he knows not
Come, come, you are well understood to be a
Alas, how can we for our country pray.
Help Marcius, help,
At difference in thee: out of that I'll work
Most noble sir,
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces
And what is left, to lose it by his country,
Prepare thy brow to frown: know'st
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
Abated captives to some nation
A vessel under sail, so men obey'd
Sir, those cold ways,
and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he
Before you find it other. All the regions
Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils
Exeunt
Ay, worthy Menenius, and with most prosperous
With no less honour to the Antiates
To him had left it solely.
You have fought together.
For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him.
Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars
Though thou speak'st truth,
The consul Coriolanus.
You should account me the more virtuous that I have
Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take
himself fears it not from another: let your general
Hath an aspect of intercession, which
What's done i' the Capitol, who's like to rise,
Have you not set them on?
Re-enter TITUS LARTIUS
No, I'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will
His popular 'shall' against a graver bench
Speak, good Sicinius.
The lamb.
Consul! what consul?
What says the other troop?
Therein behold themselves: I say again,
Alarum afar off
Welcome, ladies, Welcome!
ACT IV
Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs:
Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
With his unkindness? say't be so?
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
Banished, sir.
Answer to us.
Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?
That shapes man better, and they follow him,
So, the good horse is mine.
Intends to appear before the people, hoping
By many an ounce--he dropp'd it for his country,
Which our divines lose by 'em.
What should I do?
Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather
Deny your asking: take your choice of those
It is spoke freely out of many mouths--
Could not have made this peace.
Do smilingly revolt, and who resist
And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius:
Music still, with shouts
More bound to 's mother, yet here he lets me prate
The grave of your deserving, Rome must know
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
And perish constant fools. Who is't can blame him?
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When
Twice being  [by the people chosen]  censor,
Carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride,
SCENE VI. Rome. A public place.
And the nobility of Rome are his:
Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends,
From where he should begin and end, but will
Slew three opposers: Tarquin's self he met,
I would he had.
The thwartings of your dispositions, if
Why, so: you have made good work!
SCENE III. The same. The Forum.
It was his word: O, he would miss it rather
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
She shall, she shall.
O, sir, sir, sir,
The aediles, ho!
proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as
Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too
Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his
You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly
But, more of thy news?
Since I heard thence, these are the words: I think
Sir, the people
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known
As merry as when our nuptial day was done,
That's curdied by the frost from purest snow
How, sir! do you meddle with my master?
Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your
You have respected, stopp'd your ears against
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier
Our musty superfluity. See, our best elders.
'This we received,' and each in either side
And then I came away.
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.
SCENE I. Rome. A street.
I know this cannot be.
Of your great danger.
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?
carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears:
Soft! who comes here?
Hence, and shut your gates upon's.
My life and services.
Exeunt COMINIUS and MENENIUS
True! I'll be sworn they are true.
'Tis a spell, you see, of much  power: you know the
As much as in him lies, from time to time
'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.
That love the fundamental part of state
Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him, that
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in:
MARCIUS is shut in
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
When it was less expected: he replied,
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains:
There's some among you have beheld me fighting:
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
Save you, sir.
such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived,
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?
thee, but being assured none but myself could move
I shall, between this and supper, tell you most
A noble servant to them, but he could not
Hath thus stood for his country: therefore,
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is!
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.
Will or exceed the common or be caught
From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace
To hear themselves remember'd.
And then I'll set upon him.
Sweet madam.
Your voices therefore.' When we granted that,
you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the
The man I am.
And scarr'd the moon with splinters: here I clip
wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why,
Of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Confusion's near, I cannot speak. You, tribunes
Have we no wine here?
I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and
You speak o' the people,
You are too absolute,
Away, my disposition, and possess me
That's worthily
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence:
In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then.
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.
Enter a second Messenger
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
As words to little purpose.
In supplication nod: and my young boy
Appear not like a guest.
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Sigh'd truer breath, but that I see thee here,
But O, thy wife!
Sir, how comes't that you
piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain
What's the matter?
I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with
Could he not speak 'em fair?
Nor I.
What is granted them?
What then?
lieve be a condemned man.
Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome,
Turn terror into sport: as weeds before
You have brought
Enter COMINIUS
What is this?
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your
And state of bodies would bewray what life
Consider further,
No more of this, it does offend my heart:
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to
But with that surname, a good memory,
Though calved i' the porch o' the Capitol--
Fare ye well:
That best can aid your action.
Flower of warriors,
Cominius, no.
Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine
thou art preparing fire for us, look thee, here's
If I fly, Marcius,
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Agreed.
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.
May give you thankful sacrifice.
Good my friends,
Myself a former fortune.
To one that would do thus. I am half through,
how honour would become such a person. that it was
Not?
Was his great ancestor.
O sir, you are not right: have you not known
Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest
To make coals cheap,--a noble memory!
If not, why cease you till you are so?
dislikes, to flatter them for their love.
For 'tis a sore upon us,
A marvellous poor one.
Your only choice.
Those whose great power must try him, even this,
your voices,
perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from
Meet on the market-place. We'll attend you there:
his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity
You have received many wounds for your country.
voices that I may be consul, I have here the
For mine own part,
At his house this night.
so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and
What would you have, friend? whence are you?
Let him be call'd for.
To one whom they had punish'd.
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two,
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
My best and freshest men, served his designments
it follows,
honour, in giving him our own voices with our own
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
All will be naught else.
And, gladly quaked, hear more, where the
Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you,
Speak briefly then,
If it be possible for you to displace it with your
cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are
And in the power of us the tribunes, we,
Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo!
To break the heart of generosity,
you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the
Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath,
I offer'd to awaken his regard
never a worthier man.
tailors, and breed ballad-makers.
But owe thy pride thyself.
Sometime in Greece,--
'Twas very faintly he said 'Rise,' dismiss'd me
very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o'
A crack, madam.
Three or four miles about, else had I, sir,
As enemy to the people and his country:
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
Under the canopy.
Ever to conquer, and to have his worth
The citizens of Corioli have issued,
As poisonous of your honour: no, our suit
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
The same, sir.
He does fair justice, if he give me way,
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
devotion than can render it him, and leaves
A sennet. Enter, with actors before them, COMINIUS  the consul, MENENIUS, CORIOLANUS, Senators,  SICINIUS and BRUTUS. The Senators take their  places, the Tribunes take their Places by themselves. CORIOLANUS stands
That is the way to lay the city flat,
Away, you fool! it more becomes a man
Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone.
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a'
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
What is become of Marcius?
Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts!
O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals!
stand bald before him: our general himself makes a
SCENE II. The same. The Capitol.
Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?
Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes, the senate
Are these your herd?
Coriolanus will carry it.
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house,
Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
Beats him away. Exit third Servingman
Enter three or four Conspirators of AUFIDIUS' faction
How often he had met you, sword to sword,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
The tribunes cannot do't for shame, the people
My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it
For Rome, towards Marcius.
Nor I.
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair,
When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce
Even to my person, than I thought he would
This will I carry to Rome.
Upon this present action.
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy:
Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude,
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.
In being Coriolanus.
For insurrection's arguing.
That the precipitation might down stretch
So incapable of help.
bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you,
Exeunt
What custom wills, in all things should we do't,
The noble sister of Publicola,
I thank your ladyship, well, good madam.
With old Menenius, and those senators
Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd,
bonneted, without any further deed to have them at
This boy, that cannot tell what he would have
I should do so in honour: I am in this,
Enter a Messenger
fly?
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!
In sign of what you are, not to reward
Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth,
To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride
Flourish. Trumpets sound, and drums
I'll do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius,
Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,--
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
patience, and, in roaring for a chamber-pot,
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
Will then cry out of Marcius 'O if he
Only fair speech.
SCENE VIII. A field of battle.
You have won a happy victory to Rome,
Have you a catalogue
their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say you?
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
Not in this heat, sir, now.
Now thou'rt troublesome.
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Well said, noble woman?
Go, see him out at gates, and follow him,
Must I then do't to them?
Further than seen and one infect another
my prayers, but I cannot go thither.
Is this Menenius?
from man to dragon: he has wings, he's more than a
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius,
Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees,
'Tis true:
Let us alone to guard Corioli:
There, Coriolanus.
little finger, there is some hope the ladies of
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
We will meet them,
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter.
His good sword in his hand.
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to't:
Shouts within
A city full, of tribunes, such as you,
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!
And throw their power i' the dust.
No, take more:
Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece
Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome
Nor did you think it folly
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
To where you are bound, you must inquire your way,
Rising
I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you,
Within these three hours, Tullus,
Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows,
We have as many friends as enemies.
If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work,
By mingling them with us, the honour'd number,
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Spies of the Volsces
A goodly house: the feast smells well, but I
Re-enter second Servingman
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself!
He bow'd his nature, never known before
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
We must proceed as we do find the people.
Good or bad?
I prithee now, my son,
On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd.
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
In arms as sound as when I woo'd, in heart
begged. I have your alms: adieu.
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
Where is this viper
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Not of a woman's tenderness to be,
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
faith. How does your little son?
How probable I do not know--that Marcius,
He heard the name of death.
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus--
That it shall hold companionship in peace
And you will rather show our general louts
And had no welcomes home: but he returns,
Having fully dined before.
The hazard of much blood.
No more infected with my country's love
Than that of common sons.
Though therein you can never be too noble,
The faults of fools but folly.
All to the senate-house: some news is come
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
That would depopulate the city and
Hail, noble Marcius!
You find him like a soldier: do not take
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Than stay, past doubt, for greater:
God-den, our neighbours.
Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!
I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
You are the musty chaff, and you are smelt
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Towards her deserved children is enroll'd
Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take
To yield what passes here.
He had, my lord, and that it was which caused
No, sir: yet oft,
Than sway with them in theirs.
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
Which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd,
Than when these fellows ran about the streets,
He said he had wounds, which he could show
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance!
He cannot temperately transport his honours
day does night, it's spritely, waking, audible, and
And make triumphant fires, strew flowers before them:
Of their breath only!
again, and after it again, and over and over he
A second course of fight.
Wears this war's garland: in token of the which,
For their own good and ours.
What fellow's this?
I am one of those, his mother, wife, his child,
I am, as thy general is.
Now the good gods forbid
To the pot, I warrant him.
Say, then: 'tis true, I ought so.
The mortal gate of the city, which he painted
Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go:
And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius,
As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st
My nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch.--
SCENE III. A highway between Rome and Antium.
Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his
What he cannot help in his nature, you account a
mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible, a getter of more
Enter CAIUS MARCIUS
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
It shall be so, it shall be so.
And take our friendly senators by the hands,
Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell.
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
I' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Which by the interpretation of full time
But when goes this forward?
Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS
A flourish. Cornets. Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, bloody, with two or three Soldiers
If these shows be not outward, which of you
Here come the lords.
Deserves the extremest death.
Though I could wish
He would not answer to: forbad all names,
Kneels
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them!
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learn'd,
But was a petty servant to the state,
Re-enter two of the Citizens
You are sent for to the senate:
Like a bold flood o'er-bear. O, come, go in,
Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one
monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful,
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
Though you were born in Rome:' his bloody brow
Our Rome hath such a soldier.'
The son, the husband and the father tearing
On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home
While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins
Let him be made a coverture for the wars!
sentenced and stay upon execution.
You take my part from me, sir, I have the most cause
They have placed their men of trust?
What then, sir?
And stand upon my common part with those
Contend against thy valour. Know thou first,
Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran
That I am proud to hunt.
As they us to our trenches followed.
The people will remain uncertain whilst
What an arm he has! he turned me about with his
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
The gods assist you!
To the people! Coriolanus, patience!
Unheard, what then?
Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world
'Tis most like he will.
He'll never hear him.
The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone:
Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium?
Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice,
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Before and in Corioli, let me say,
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine,
If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives,
Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
tongues into those wounds and speak for them, so, if
Do not stand upon't.
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Your temples burned in their cement, and
If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there,
The anvil of my sword, and do contest
Stand in their ancient strength.
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that
a cudgel, and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours,
thee, I have been blown out of your gates with
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Leave us to cure this cause.
We have.
As reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves I prize
Where's Cotus? my master calls
Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end,
O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,
rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother,
Nay, come away.
Let's to the Capitol,
Know, I pray you,--
Who's yonder,
He waged me with his countenance, as if
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
To the Tribunes
single: your abilities are too infant-like for
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
And, mutually participate, did minister
Pray now, your news?
Opinion that so sticks on Marcius shall
Of the whole body. The belly answer'd--
Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other,
As he is proud to do't.
therein would have found issue. Hear me profess
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
Ay, and for an assault too.
We stood to't in good time.
I have borne this business.
To answer mildly, for they are prepared
Go tell the lords o' the city I am here:
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Deserves your hate, and your affections are
And cannot now accept, to grace him only
Marcius,
A pair of tribunes that have rack'd for Rome,
The people are the city.
you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink
And so did I.
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
Though in Rome litter'd--not Romans--as they are not,
Where is that slave
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus
Most valour, spoke not for them: the accusation
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses,
Friend,
Of his demerits rob Cominius.
Is all the policy, strength and defence,
Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all
more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I
'Tear him to pieces.' 'Do it presently.' 'He kill'd
And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all.
perfecter giber for the table than a necessary
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
Stand, and go back.
CORIOLANUS offers to go away
bewitchment of some popular man and give it
To him or our authorities. For an end,
At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,
Where is this fellow?
favour is well approved by your tongue. What's the
'Tribunes!' 'Patricians!' 'Citizens!' 'What, ho!'
No, good madam, pardon me, indeed, I will not forth.
CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear
Peace, ho! no outrage: peace!
Enter a company of mutinous Citizens, with staves, clubs, and other weapons
danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel
Where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field?
Your ignorant election, enforce his pride,
They'll open of themselves.
All's well, and might have been much better, if
Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba,
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
If!
And say 'Tis true,' I'ld not believe them more
mummers, set up the bloody flag against all
Heart-hardening spectacles, tell these sad women
Where dwellest thou?
You must return and mend it.
To better vantage.
And occupations perish!
His deeds with doing them, and is content
Are suitors to you.
The benefit of our levies, answering us
For we are peremptory to dispatch
With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.
Than hear say how I got them.
turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. But
That we with smoking swords may march from hence,
I muse my mother
Must, as a foreign recreant, be led
afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an
They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know
And on a safer judgment all revoke
How! I inform them!
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast,
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love
distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment,
I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Nay, keep your place.
Red as 'twould burn Rome, and his injury
With their refusal, both observe and answer
Especially in pride.
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth,
Bring your army, but, I think, you'll find
Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would
Without assistance.
Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, with Attendants
love not Marcius.
ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who,
Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that
Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli:
Hear me one word,
Of what is to be dreaded.
How more unfortunate than all living women
In execution.
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
What shouts are these? The other side o' the city
Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer
Of what lies heavy to't.
Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
A mile before his tent fall down, and knee
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat,
He was not taken well, he had not dined:
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
I am so dishonour'd that the very hour
That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
Where it did mark, it took, from face to foot
Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'
do his worst. For you, be that you are, long, and
home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?
No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the
Exit
I'll follow thee a month, devise with thee
Of what that want might ruin.
The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods!
Enter a second Servingman
You that be noble, help him, young and old!
Should from yond cloud speak divine things,
I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.
I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the
We let the people know't.
look upon his school-master.
Be calm, be calm.
It was a bare petition of a state
Not yet thou knowest me, and, seeing me, dost not
No,'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.
A noble cunning: you were used to load me
Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,
Reason, because they then less need one another.
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles,
To bring the roof to the foundation,
you much mirth.
Look, sir, your mother!
In our well-found successes, to report
[Aside]  I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and
Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches, for
To give or to forgive, but when we have stuff'd
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
This is clean kam.
the physician: the most sovereign prescription in
Into destruction cast him.
Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
Reads
Were feverous and did tremble.
O Tullus,--
Where is he, hear you?
Can thereto frame his spirit.
My noble masters, hear me speak.
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
Why did you wish me milder? would you have me
I say 'your city,' to his wife and mother,
not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.
To be full quit of those my banishers,
That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate.
Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.
and give out
They sound a parley. Enter two Senators with others on the walls
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour
Fame, at the which he aims,
Enter a Messenger, hastily
Why that way?
Be hostages for Rome.
Of thy deep duty more impression show
You have made
Were he more angry at it.
Since I have ever follow'd thee with hate,
And tapers burn'd to bedward!
I'll give my reasons,
With one that wants her wits?
A sick man's appetite, who desires most that
Upon their ancient malice will forget
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Let's make the best of it.
Cominius, Marcius your old enemy,
[To the Citizens]  Hence to your homes, be gone!
SCENE I. Rome. Before a gate of the city.
As I do pray the gods.
A long flourish. They all cry 'Marcius! Marcius!'  cast up their caps and lances: COMINIUS and LARTIUS stand bare
Enter an AEdile
And he shall feel mine edge.
Directitude! what's that?
That brought thee to this world.
Indeed, no, by your patience, I'll not over the
To the Senators
To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.
Because I am the store-house and the shop
Yes, worthy sir,
From whom I have received not only greetings,
Exit AEdile
And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats,
We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth,
but they think we are too dear: the leanness that
We cannot keep the town.
Deliver them this paper: having read it,
Where? at the senate-house?
Together with the seal o' the senate, what
Drums and trumpets sound, with great shouts of the People
Clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone,
If I say fine, cry 'Fine,' if death, cry 'Death.'
Exit Gentlewoman
The ruin of the state.
That both our powers, with smiling
You have put me now to such a part which never
What is it?--Coriolanus must I call thee?--
thee straight,
Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt
Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains,
occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience:
As shall be proved upon you?
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not,
And quietness of the people, which before
Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
Enter a Messenger
May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.
Not according to the prayer of the people, for they
Peace!
Well, on to the market-place.
sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer
The heart that conn'd them.
Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him,
Worthy sir, thou bleed'st,
Exeunt
Is't a verdict?
Most sweet voices!
Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself
A match, sir. There's in all two worthy voices
Sir, his stoutness
What work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you
To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts
When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.
This a consul? no.
If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
Lie in the interpretation of the time:
Because that now it lies you on to speak
I have tumbled past the throw, and in his praise
The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection!
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you,--
Let the high office and the honour go
Content, content.
has letters from the general, wherein he gives my
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations,
For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you
Of present death.
As if he did contemn what he requested
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd
Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun,
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him,
Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.
O, stand up blest!
Come, we'll inform them
tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how
My rage is gone,
Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.
confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
From me receive that natural competency
I'll do his country service.
Yield, Marcius, yield!
Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.
Alarum. The Romans are beat back to their trenches. Re-enter MARCIUS cursing
O'er the vast world to seek a single man,
should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
I thank you, general,
When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste
Be free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.
which should
We do it not alone, sir.
Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son
For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt,
I' the body of the weal, and now, arriving
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general,
They are worn, lord consul, so,
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep,
Of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly,
That hath beside well in his person wrought
'Tis Aufidius,
Pray you, let's to him.
you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a
Be rein'd again to temperance, then he speaks
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
That Marcius shall be consul:
Take up a brace o' the best of them, yea, the
You must not speak of that: you must desire them
Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st!
Of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost:
Could he say less?
Exit
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
should not pass here, no, though it were as virtuous
That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours,
Unknown to the beginning.
That I would have spoke of:
I got them in my country's service, when
And will deny him:
To banish your defenders, till at length
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come,
are coming.
Fear not our care, sir.
The end of war's uncertain, but this certain,
and the man in blood, they will out of their
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Associated with Aufidius, rages
We prove this very hour.
Exit
The blood upon your visage dries, 'tis time
Wish we all joy and honour.
malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck
A' shall not tread on me,
say, if he would incline to the people, there was
Leave this faint puling and lament as I do,
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
What then?
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Hear'st thou, Mars?
disease our better mirth.
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you.
O, let me clip ye
They all bustle about CORIOLANUS, crying
That have beheld the doing.
This is strange now: do you two know how you are
hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.
Enter a Gentlewoman
Away!
So did we all. But, come, let's home.
if he could burn us all into one coal,
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
have, I am one that, telling true under him, must
It then remains
But then Aufidius was with in my view,
This man has marr'd his fortune.
Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you.
Re-enter CORIOLANUS
So did I, I'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest
Let me but stand, I will not hurt your hearth.
He's not confirm'd, we may deny him yet.
One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,--there's
To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Aged sir, hands off.
But had he died in the business, madam, how then?
Wert thou the Hector
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Think upon me! hang 'em!
The corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
One jot of ceremony.
He doth appear.
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate,
And the desire of the nobles.
Our guider, come, to the Roman camp conduct us.
me: your name, I think, is Adrian.
And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
And to make us no better thought of, a little help
Exit
Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand
Right worthy you priority.
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
It is the humane way: the other course
Consider you what services he has done for his country?
behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to
I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but
A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it,
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
Exeunt CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS
When you curse them as enemies.
Thy thoughts with nobleness, that thou mayst prove
Was to send him, for whose old love I have,
and make him good friend to the people!
What then!
Peace!
Tiber in't, said to be something imperfect in
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
disposition, and out of his noble carelessness lets
in him than there is milk in a male tiger, that
Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home,
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Direct me, if it be your will,
Who deserves greatness
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Only my wars with him: he is a lion
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
It shall be so.
pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom,
Why, what of that?
Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd
Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave!
been a rod to her friends, you have not indeed loved
For no less spoil than glory,--
I heard him swear,
Attend us through the city.
In his behalf.
O, me alone! make you a sword of me?
second day of audience. When you are hearing a
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
Exeunt Citizens
Lose those he hath won.
And mountainous error be too highly heapt
Good Marcius home again.
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world,
On the sudden,
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service,
As cause had call'd you up, have held him to
Loved me above the measure of a father,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
He did, my lord.
And follow Marcius.
What could the belly answer?
To unstable slightness: purpose so barr'd,
When he did need your loves, and do you think
But as a discontented friend, grief-shot
A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven
counterfeitly, that is, sir, I will counterfeit the
And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's:
another, his wife another, and, I think, there's one
Sits safe and still without him.
Cannot be!
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours.
He's coming.
Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels,
Than we to stretch it out.
Had borne the action of yourself, or else
accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my
Made by some other deity than nature,
Ha! what is that?
Against us brats, with no less confidence
We have been down together in my sleep,
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed
The night to the owl and morn to the lark
Exeunt
The sides o' the world, against all colour here
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
Her pretty action did outsell her gift,
By the very truth of it, I care not for you,
[Aside]  All of her that is out of door most rich!
And hath as oft a slanderous epitaph
To after-eye him.
Art thou a feodary for this act, and look'st
To who shall find them.
'Tis very like.
Now mingled with their courages, will make known
Unless thou think'st me devilish--is't not meet
That all the abhorred things o' the earth amend
If you seek
A very drudge of nature's, have subdued me
For mine own part, unfold a dangerous speech,
If that thy gentry, Britain, go before
Prithee, say.
Pisanio have mapped it truly. How fit his garments
Be't so:
Enter CLOTEN and Lords
But that he swore to take, our lives? The law
Statist though I am none, nor like to be,
I saw't this morning: confident I am
To look upon the holy sun, to have
As I have received it.
Nice longing, slanders, mutability,
Thy condemnation and thy death.
I pray, draw near.
Most pretty things to say: ere I could tell him
Solicit'st here a lady that disdains
If you will swear you have not done't, you lie,
We have noted it. Call her before us, for
Aside
That did attend themselves and had the virtue
Being so near the truth as I will make them,
Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus!
Whose roof's as low as ours! Stoop, boys, this gate
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys
never return to tell one.
Exeunt
Still close as sure.
Here were a fairy.
How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
Methinks, I see him now--
Will do's commission throughly: and I think
thing that I have commanded thee: the third is,
'Twill not be lost.
Their several virtues and effects.
testiness, shall turn all into my commendations. My
And happier much by his affliction made.
The best feather of our wing--have mingled sums
with your eyes. Take notice that I am in Cambria,
him that made the tailor, not be fit too? the
All but in that! Good wax, thy leave. Blest be
If that his head have ear in music,--doubtless
Stand, stand, and fight!
Since she is living, let the time run on
He spake of her, as Dian had hot dreams,
Stoop'd as to foot us: his ascension is
I have read three hours then: mine eyes are weak:
First, her bedchamber,--
Thou takest up
How can she be with him? When was she missed?
The venison first shall be the lord o' the feast,
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves
Myself by with a needle, that I might prick
By history, report, or his own proof,
Lucius preconsul: and to you the tribunes,
As I would serve a rat.'
Where is thy head? where's that? Ay me!
rather--saving reverence of the word--for 'tis said
SCENE I. Britain. The Roman camp.
Frighted, and anger'd worse: go bid my woman
Of your chaste daughter the wide difference
To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio! man!
have threaten'd
So far I read aloud:
could then have looked on him without the help of
Her assured credit. Blessed live you long!
Was near at hand: ne'er long'd my mother so
As I am mad, I do:
O gods!
I' the swathing-clothes the other, from their nursery
You are my father too, and did relieve me,
O rare instinct!
These three,
Ay, or a stomach.
Where ill men were, and was the best of all
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court
There is no more such masters: I may wander
Made Lud's town with rejoicing fires bright
What crows have peck'd them here. He brags
Alack, the king!
Clock strikes
Her doors lock'd?
Make thy demand aloud.
Accuse the thunderer, whose bolt, you know,
And think they are my sons, are none of mine,
I am, sir,
Yet is it true, sir.
How much the quantity, the weight as much,
Will make what's homely savoury: weariness
light, the purse too light, being drawn of
'Tis mine, and this will witness outwardly,
Ay, my noble lord.
And cry myself awake? that's false to's bed, is it?
But end it by some means for Imogen.
I fast and pray'd for their intelligence--thus:
And yet of moment to, for it concerns
Try many, all good, serve truly, never
'Twixt sky and ground. Wilt thou hear more, my lord?
Thou dost approve thyself the very same:
Than in his feats deserving it--for him
Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor
And, to be brief, my practise so prevail'd,
Thy crystal window ope, look out,
The sharded beetle in a safer hold
In killing creatures vile, as cats and dogs,
of mine: how worthy he is I will leave to appear
Too dull for your good wearing?
Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
Endure our law: thou'rt dead.
This paper is the history of my knowledge
tooth-ache: but a man that were to sleep your
Pray, let us follow 'em.
Egregious murderer, thief, any thing
the fellow dares not deceive me.
were one. I would we were all of one mind, and one
A rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel
All lovers young, all lovers must
Companions to our person and will fit you
The innocent mansion of my love, my heart,
Been all the worth of's car. Away to Britain
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest
[Aside]                 Or this, or perish.
How! my good name? or to report of you
shall be lopped branches, which, being dead many
Of place 'tween high and low. Our foe was princely
How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills,
So they must,
'Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Send your trunk to me, it shall safe be kept,
Yet who than he more mean?--to knit their souls,
Never bestrid a horse, save one that had
Nay, what hope
Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill,
And spare no blood beside.
I am sorry for thee:
Your servant, princes. Good my lord of Rome,
[Aside]	It is my mistress:
These two young gentlemen, that call me father
That this will prove a war, and you shall hear
than any the rarest of our ladies in France.
As once our mother, use like note and words,
Exeunt CYMBELINE and Lords
Fear no more the frown o' the great,
In that he spake too far.
How parted with your brothers? how first met them?
I'll follow those that even now fled hence,
By this sun that shines,
Will remain hers.
Before my perfect honour, swore to Cymbeline
According to the honour of his sender,
Despairing died.
If I would lose it for a revenue
Swallows some
The purpose I then follow'd. That I was he,
Is severally in all. Let's quit this ground,
Distinction should be rich in. Where? how lived You?
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Bringing me here to kill me.
The press of boats or pride: a piece of work
May be call'd ransom, let it come: sufficeth
ACT IV
O'ercome you with her show, and in time,
less welcome.
Good morrow to your majesty and to my gracious mother.
To your best kindness: one of your great knowing
Knock off his manacles, bring your prisoner to the king.
Men's vows are women's traitors! All good seeming,
And kiss'd it, madam.
If you can make't apparent
Poor house, that keep'st thyself!
Encounter such revolt.
His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom, whom
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend!
Where is thy lady? In a word, or else
not beneath him in fortunes, beyond him in the
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
Thou know'st not what, but take it for thy labour:
yet famine,
you should have been put together with so mortal a
The Briton reveller.
From south to west on wing soaring aloft,
My daughter! what of her? Renew thy strength:
Read, and declare the meaning.
But to win time
I will yet do you service.
their mother,
For being now a favourer to the Briton,
And therewithal the best, or let her beauty
Till hasty Polydote return, and bring him
Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learn'd me how
He is a Roman, no more kin to me
A franklin's housewife.
We count not worth the hanging, but none human,
Continued so, until we thought he died.
Into a havior of less fear, ere wildness
Re-enter PISANIO, with the clothes
Thou precious varlet,
Whose rags shamed gilded arms, whose naked breast
It is Posthumus' hand, I know't. Sirrah, if thou
With your stiff age: but unto us it is
O, I am known
Ay, my good lord.
Did put the yoke upon 's, which to shake off
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court
And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch!
Longs after for the garbage.
Exit
I would they had not come between us.
What have you dream'd of late of this war's purpose?
Leonatus' friends.
If I had lost it,
Almost the sum he pays.
abate her nothing, though I profess myself her
I am fall'n in this offence.
Good my liege,
Give answer to this boy, and do it freely,
Attending nature's law:
O'erpays all I can do. By this, your king
O, above measure false!
Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
Thus raps you? Are you well?
No bond but to do just ones. Gods! if you
Which not to read would show the Britons cold:
The way that they did, and to grin like lions
And left me bare to weather.
The noblest ta'en.
betwixt us. Only, thus far you shall answer: if
down by lawful counsel, and straight away for
Might well have warm'd old Saturn, that I thought her
Enter, from one side, LUCIUS, IACHIMO, and  the Roman Army: from the other side, the  British Army, POSTHUMUS LEONATUS following,  like a poor soldier. They march over and go  out. Then enter again, in skirmish, IACHIMO  and POSTHUMUS LEONATUS he vanquisheth and disarmeth IACHIMO, and then leaves him
When he was here,
For torturers ingenious: it is I
A mother to the birth of three? Ne'er mother
With charitable bill,--O bill, sore-shaming
I will confirm with oath, which, I doubt not,
remain unseduced, you not making it appear
Sir--I thank her--that:
father, who may haply be a little angry for my so
The smile mocking the sigh, that it would fly
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
But not so citizen a wanton as
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
Her chambers are all lock'd, and there's no answer
If each of you should take this course, how many
Well, then, here's the point:
What, art thou mad?
You, Polydote, have proved best woodman and
Nursing of my sons!
Or do your honour injury.
Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, crack'd
Upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star,
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevail'd
Whose mother was her painting, hath betray'd him:
I am too blunt and saucy: here's my knee:
Where then
The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
Which must approve thee honest: 'If Pisanio
The south-fog rot him!
And thus I set my foot on 's neck,' even then
a fool you were upon the ground.
Continue where he is: to shift his being
[Aside]  I'll write to my lord she's dead. O Imogen,
Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.'
Must justify my knowledge.
The cloyed will,
Is quite forgot. He was a queen's son, boys,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
Enter LUCIUS, IACHIMO, the Soothsayer, and other  Roman Prisoners, guarded, POSTHUMUS LEONATUS behind, and IMOGEN
I'll weringly to him: to gain his colour
That a king's children should be so convey'd,
Will then be pang'd by me. Prithee, dispatch:
I left out one thing which the queen confess'd.
I'll tell you, sir, in private, if you please
That warmer days would come: in these sear'd hopes,
Could not find death where I did hear him groan,
By thee to us, and he shall be interr'd
must take me up for swearing, as if I borrowed mine
In suit the place of's bed and win this ring
Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But, alack,
Your pleasure was my mere offence, my punishment
Wert thou the son of Jupiter and no more
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands
All turn'd to heresy? Away, away,
There was a fourth man, in a silly habit,
To CYMBELINE
The cognizance of her incontinency
Your legs are young, I'll tread these flats. Consider,
Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy
Throw me again.
Enter BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS.
Cadwal,
SCENE VI. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius.
Whilst what we have kill'd be cook'd.
thinks scorn,
Did you but know the city's usuries
Will serve our long inter'gatories. See,
Have we thus met? O, never say hereafter
is damned.
Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
SCENE III. Another part of the field.
Enter, from the cave, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, and IMOGEN
The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance!
Can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows
Ay, with all my heart,
Britain, lest the bargain should catch cold and
Fear no more the lightning flash,
Marry, the gods forfend!
How much of his displeasure.
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
He said he was gentle, but unfortunate,
Thou hast robb'd me of this deed: I would revenges,
O
Well, my lord.
As good as promise.
Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stol'n,
a vice in her ears, which horse-hairs and
As it is like him--might break out, and swear
I wish ye sport.
I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
More of thee merited than a band of Clotens
He hath a kind of honour sets him off,
Every good servant does not all commands:
As war were hoodwink'd.
Of his queen mother, which for more probation
Enter QUEEN, Ladies, and CORNELIUS
charge nature,
A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
When Imogen is dead.
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender'd
As record of fair act, nay, many times,
Where is she, sir? How
The due of honour in no point omit.
are yours, so is your diamond too: if I come off,
Nay, follow'd him, till he had melted from
And the remembrancer of her to hold
Till the injurious Romans did extort
Creatures may be alike: were 't he, I am sure
abridgement
Was sulphurous to smell: the holy eagle
By heavens, I'll go:
Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man: what
To good or bad.
He sits 'mongst men like a descended god:
Greet you our victory? you look like Romans,
One bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes,
sleep, and a hangman to help him to bed, I think he
Of that most delicate lodging: by my life,
With Mars fall out, with Juno chide,
Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made
For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon.
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
That cravens my weak hand. Come, here's my heart.
Was call'd Sicilius, who did join his honour
I Know her women are about her: what
Help, Jupiter, or we appeal,
Jupiter descends in thunder and lightning, sitting  upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt. The Apparitions fall on their knees
Money, youth?
It shall be so.
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
There's livers out of Britain.
Who's there?
adorer, not her friend.
'Justice, and your father's wrath, should he take me
SONG
Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
No, madam, for so long
That place them on the truth of girls and boys.
SCENE III. Wales: a mountainous country with a cave.
Exit PISANIO
As quarrelous as the weasel, nay, you must
hurt done!
Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave
I humbly take my leave.
The mortal bugs o' the field.
When shall I hear all through? This fierce
The treasure of her honour. No more. To what end?
They take for natural father. The game is up.
No, no.
Solemn music. Enter, as in an apparition,  SICILIUS LEONATUS, father to Posthumus Leonatus,  an old man, attired like a warrior, leading in  his hand an ancient matron, his wife, and mother  to Posthumus Leonatus, with music before them:  then, after other music, follow the two young  Leonati, brothers to Posthumus Leonatus, with  wounds as they died in the wars. They circle Posthumus Leonatus round, as he lies sleeping
Not half so old as that. I'll write against them,
Dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant
Thou gavest me poison: dangerous fellow, hence!
If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad,
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
I will have it no lay.
My fault being nothing--as I have told you oft--
To sour your happiness, I must report
Exeunt
With unchaste purpose and with oath to violate
garments were come. She said upon a time--the
'Tis certain she is fled.
The shrinking slaves of winter.
How bravely thou becomest thy bed, fresh lily,
Be cross'd with slowness, labour be his meed!
So vanish'd: which foreshow'd our princely eagle,
It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
And ring is yours, if not, the foul opinion
the very description of their meeting-place, and
And, but she spoke it dying, I would not
Let his arms alone,
I bid for you as I'd buy.
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
Where is thy lady? Or, by Jupiter,--
And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike:
Of one persuaded well of--
Let me alone with him.
That caused a lesser villain than myself,
Think on my words.
Thou ask'st me such a question. Have I not been
I am bound to you.
Exit
Arise my knights o' the battle: I create you
She can scarce be there yet.
to thee. My revenge is now at Milford: would I had
To stride a limit.
Are master of the feast: Cadwal and I
On his command: he would not suffer me
How many score of miles may we well ride
Sleeps. IACHIMO comes from the trunk
'Our Britain s harts die flying, not our men:
So worthy as thy birth.
Will I first work: he's for his master,
I have assailed her with music, but she vouchsafes no notice.
For wearing our own noses.
O cunning, how I got it!--nay, some marks
I kiss'd it, and it gave me present hunger
turn'd coward
Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.
The fingers of the powers above do tune
Of hardiness is mother. Ho! who's here?
Your younger princely son, he, sir, was lapp'd
Or by some other.
I hope so: go and search.
Discover where thy mistress is at once,
When I desire it too.
Which first, perchance, she'll prove on
Thou shalt not damn my hand.
'Tis in my cloak-bag--doublet, hat, hose, all
Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian,
An honest one, I warrant, who deserved
Again, and bring me word how 'tis with her.
By the queen's dram she swallow'd.
Come, I'll to my chamber. Would there had been some
Look through a casement to allure false hearts
I thank you.--By yond bush?--Pray, how far thither?
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment
Both noisome and infectious.
Wilt thou not speak to me?
Died with their swords in hand, for which
Of any king's in Europe. I do think
She should that duty leave unpaid to you,
But by example--O, a sin in war,
The piece of tender air, thy virtuous daughter,
To yield me often tidings: neither know I
Of what commands I should be subject to,
Thanks, good sir:
I never saw
Well, madam.
They were not born for bondage.
Fell bravely and were slain,
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
If you will make't an action, call witness to't.
And cook to honest creatures: but 'tis not so,
My brother wears thee not the one half so well
When you above perceive me like a crow,
As soldiers can. Be cheerful, wipe thine eyes
To employ you towards this Roman. Come, our queen.
With his own single hand he'ld take us in
'His garment!' Now the devil--
Who dares not stand his foe, I'll be his friend,
To inherit such a haven: but first of all,
There lie thy part.
And I am something curious, being strange,
How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not
The exile of her minion is too new,
Hath to it circumstantial branches, which
it is done, thou art the pandar to her dishonour and
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Be assured, madam,
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
and I'll be merry in my revenge.
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
Hum!
Exeunt Ladies
relief nor my voice for thy preferment.
You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I
Safely, I think: 'twas a contention in public,
Guard me, beseech ye.
A repulse: though your attempt, as you call it,
Philarmonus!
Re-enter Attendant
That mount the Capitol, join gripes with hands
Murderous to the senses? That confirms it home:
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal! No:
And he's at some hard point. Speak, man: thy tongue
And thou shalt die for't.
Past hope, and in despair, that way, past grace.
'His meanest garment!' Well.
To BELARIUS
Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to the east,
Some mortally, some slightly touch'd, some falling
Without me, as within me, not imagined, felt.
In my bedchamber.
Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed
With an my heart.
What's in't is precious, if you are sick at sea,
Believe false teachers: though those that
I might know more.
You are mistaken: the one may be sold, or given, if
Yet keeps his book uncross'd: no life to ours.
SCENE V. Britain. A room in Cymbeline's palace.
For many years thought dead, are now revived,
My lords, you are appointed for that office,
No single soul
SCENE II. The same. A public place.
The harmony of this peace. The vision
With dignities becoming your estates.
How fares thy mistress?
What air's from home. Haply this life is best,
The roof o' the chamber
So to be false with her.
But that my resolution helps me. Milford,
Pardon's the word to all.
As you did mean indeed to be our brother,
Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him
Look, here he comes,
cause to use thee with a serious industry, that is,
I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
O, learn'd indeed were that astronomer
By medicine life may be prolong'd, yet death
Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline.
Then waved his handkerchief?
I know 'tis he. We are held as outlaws: hence!
gibbets, I never saw one so prone. Yet, on my
backside the town.
Our grace can make him so.
After long absence, such is yours: most welcome!
I thank you. Let's withdraw,
No my lord,
That here by mountaineers lies slain. Alas!
How should I be revenged? If this be true,--
'Twas very Cloten.
Hath her life been, the cure whereof, my lord,
Which I left with her?
the adventure, our crows shall fare the better
When fearful wars point at me, her son gone,
ground of your fair mistress, make her go back, even
Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers,
Divide themselves between you!
Lamentable! What,
Which you know cannot err: the love I bear him
Preserved the Britons, was the Romans' bane.'
Then, if you can,
Hence, vile instrument!
O melancholy!
It may be probable she lost it, or
How deeply you at once do touch me! Imogen,
You must forget to be a woman, change
Come on, tune: if you can penetrate her with your
His steeds to water at those springs
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind,
my wish hath a preferment in 't.
Or we poor ghosts will cry
And from thy justice fly.
I love thee more and more: think more and more
At point to sink for food. But what is this?
A page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
To bathe my lips upon, this hand, whose touch,
right cheek
And sauced our broths, as Juno had been sick
From this earth-vexing smart.
You say he is so fell.
You shall not now be stol'n, you have locks upon you,
Dead to my husband?
Lives in men's eyes and will to ears and tongues
Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods,
It's almost morning, is't not?
What is become of her.
And make me put into contempt the suits
Their tenor good, I trust.
I have seen, as that diamond of yours outlustres
Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends,
And, to kill the marvel,
Presenting a small box
violence of action hath made you reek as a
Of no more bondage be, to where they are made,
This matter of marrying his king's daughter, wherein
A strain of rareness: and I grieve myself
Attend the queen and us, we shall have need
We did, so please your highness.
Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers
My father hath a reason for't.
I' the cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit
Let us with care perform his great behest.
Would it had been so, that they
Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear
precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.
Than thine own worth prefer thee: go with me.
So feat, so nurse-like: let his virtue join
bodily part of your mistress, my ten thousand ducats
He did incline to sadness, and oft-times
Ay, good youth!
A thing
Your faithful servant: I dare lay mine honour
Affected greatness got by you, not you:
And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us,
When 't pleased you to employ me.
How come these staggers on me?
If she be furnish'd with a mind so rare,
And did avoid a puttock.
Although the victor, we submit to Caesar,
How swift his ship.
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Though he have served a Roman: save him, sir,
Honour'd with confirmation your great judgment
Revengingly enfeebles me, or could this carl,
Pieces of gold 'gainst this which then he wore
Well, 'tis done:
You must know,
Make not, sir,
O, she was nought, and long of her it was
For this from stiller seats we came,
No swearing.
Away! I do condemn mine ears that have
I yet not understand the case myself.
Thy mother's dead.
I cannot do it better than in gyves,
As we do air, fast as 'twas minister'd,
The ground that gave them first has them again:
By a sharp torture.
for the gift: the other is not a thing for sale,
O giglot fortune!--to master Caesar's sword,
Enter CYMBELINE and Lords
O gracious lady,
Peep through thy marble mansion, help,
Exeunt
Behoves me keep at utterance. I am perfect
[Reads]  'Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath played the
The adornment of her bed, the arras, figures,
held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect
You were as flowers, now wither'd: even so
Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is
What is betid to Cloten, but remain
Nay, be not angry, sir.
Enter PISANIO and IMOGEN
Since I received command to do this business
Together, have one dust, yet reverence,
And let it be confiscate all, so soon
Be used more thankfully. In himself, 'tis much,
free entertainment.
He little cares for and a daughter who
hand. Why tribute? why should we pay tribute? If
When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fulness
That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis
Is strange and peevish.
I will not ask again. Close villain,
Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made
SCENE II. Field of battle between the British and Roman camps.
Call forth your soothsayer: as I slept, methought
But not approach'd.
That he spake to thee?
Prunes the immortal wing and cloys his beak,
[To IMOGEN]  You are not well: remain here in the cave,
O'er borne i' the former wave: ten, chased by one,
Since Leonatus's false.
The queen, and princess.
So the revenge alone pursued me! Polydore,
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu!
Cassibelan: I do not say I am one, but I have a
To that your diamond, I'll keep them.
We'll come to you after hunting.
Chaste Dian bathing: never saw I figures
There might have been,
to the yielding, had I admittance and opportunity to friend.
All offices of nature should again
Your mother too:
The wager you have laid.
Our expectation that it would be thus
To the field, to the field!
'His meanest garment!'
Ere such another Julius. Britain is
Come, stand thou by our side,
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
We'll higher to the mountains, there secure us.
serve me! Why should his mistress, who was made by
In France: 'tis plate of rare device, and jewels
A goodly day not to keep house, with such
Not to be shaked, the agent for his master
A grave: come, arm him. Boy, he is preferr'd
To buy a present for the emperor
In all that I can do.
SCENE I. Britain. A hall in Cymbeline's palace.
His measure duly.
Pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart,
I would adventure.
Thy name?
And then she's yours.
Was that it was, for not being such a smile,
And therein you are senseless.
them may have crook'd noses, but to owe such
To ask of whence you are. Report it.
Who's there that knocks?
These flowers are like the pleasures of the world,
Upon this fairest prisoner.
The consequence o' the crown, and must not soil
What can from Italy annoy us, but
Lead, lead.
A law-breaker, a villain: yield thee, thief.
To send it me.
Not wagging his sweet head, and yet as rough,
Where?
I will inform your father.
was up so early: he cannot choose but take this
Must court'sy at the censure:--O boys, this story
So. Begin.
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
We'll not be long away.
Think that you are upon a rock, and now
Let's reinforce, or fly.
Or senseless speaking or a speaking such
Doth miracle itself, loved before me.
Let us from it.
Why, he but sleeps:
I'll now taste of thy drug.
Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid
Most worthy prince, as yours, is true Guiderius:
thing loves him in my despite. What mortality is!
To give him welcome.
The truest manner'd, such a holy witch
And when came you to serve our Roman captive?
to-day at bowls I'll win to-night of him. Come, go.
you, O the dearest of creatures, would even renew me
Exit CLOTEN
LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.'
I wrote him Imogen was slain: 'tis strange:
Enter PISANIO, with a letter
It was a worthy building. How! a page!
Pray, walk awhile.
Exeunt BELARIUS and ARVIRAGUS
Or, by our greatness and the grace of it,
Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly. This Posthumus,
I did.
Stand you! You have land enough of your own: but
[To PISANIO]            Hark thee, a word.
Re-enter PISANIO and Ladies
Is warm'd by the rest, and takes it thankfully.
Woman its pretty self--into a waggish courage:
To thee, Posthumus.
Almost midnight, madam.
And sear up my embracements from a next
I'll keep, if but for sympathy.
What is more cordial. Nay, I prethee, take it,
As these poor pickaxes can dig, and when
Lessen'd herself, and in the beams o' the sun
Sir, the event
As I wear mine, are titles but of scorn.
We grieve at chances here. Away!
I know the shape of's leg: this is his hand,
Rather directly fly.
Nay, come, let's go together.
Must not in haste abuse--if it be true,
She hath not yet forgot him: some more time
If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed,
[Reads]  'When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself
Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself
Hark, Polydore, it sounds! But what occasion
purpose as then each bore, upon importance of so
Exit Lady
Stark, as you see:
I'll be sworn--
To the Guard
I saw Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, wing'd
Outsells them all, I love her therefore: but
Too bad for bad report: and he that hath her--
your bowl.
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrain'd
Where is she, sir? Come nearer,
The power that I have on you is, to spare you,
The queen, sir, very oft importuned me
they dare not fight with me, because of the queen my
Comparative for your virtues, to be styled
Thy master in bleeding: say his name, good friend.
You speak him far.
No blame be to you, sir, for all was lost,
To thee the reed is as the oak:
So Caesar shall not find them.
This viperous slander enters. What cheer, madam?
Where is our daughter? She hath not appear'd
Hath mock'd me. I am faint.
[Advancing]             Ay, so thou dost,
You may wear her in title yours: but, you know,
If any thing that's civil, speak, if savage,
And but the backs of Britons seen, all flying
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
Why should excuse be born or e'er begot?
If I discover'd not which way she was gone,
Then in my pocket, which directed him
hither: let it be thy lint service, go.
Nor satisfying us.
Your lady's person: is she ready?
What's this, Comelius?
let me bate,-but not like me--yet long'st,
Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir,
bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak surmises,
Than have seen this.
With female fairies will his tomb be haunted,
Evil-eyed unto you: you're my prisoner, but
To winter-ground thy corse.
Am that Belarius whom you sometime banish'd:
Will not endure his yoke, and for ourself
Your daughter's chastity--there it begins.
Thou hast thy mistress still, to boot, my son,
She's my good lady, and will conceive, I hope,
For this immediate levy, he commends
In a great pool a swan's nest: prithee, think
Leave us to ourselves, and make yourself some comfort
When from the mountain-top Pisanio show'd thee,
Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile,
Hail, heaven!
Make haste: who has the note of them?
pastime with us a day or two, or longer: if
Would testify, to enrich mine inventory.
it he is to sojourn with you? How creeps
But, failing of her end by his strange absence,
Once more let me behold it: is it that
Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find
From most true wretchedness: so thou, Posthumus,
From one bad thing to worse, not frenzy, not
As fair and as good--a kind of hand-in-hand
More than the world enjoys.
Bring this apparel to my chamber, that is the second
And that will well confirm it.
speech of insultment ended on his dead body, and
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady,
SCENE IV. Country near Milford-Haven.
Past grace? obedience?
She's punish'd for her truth, and undergoes,
The deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief,
So soon as I can win the offended king,
A sly and constant knave,
Not he: but yet heaven's bounty towards him might
with no more advantage than the opportunity of a
Great nature, like his ancestry,
To PISANIO
Exit
Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece
too that die against their wills, so should I, if I
whatsoever he be. Who told you of this stranger?
Our subjects, sir,
not.
Thanks, Jupiter!
You snatch some hence for little faults, that's love,
'Tis strange he hides him in fresh cups, soft beds,
Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome,
And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio?
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome,
but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain
I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:
As when his god is pleased.
SCENE III. A room in Cymbeline's palace.
Re-enter GUIDERIUS
His father and I were soldiers together, to whom I
Where, in a frenzy, in my master's garments,
And every day do honour to her grave:
But clay and clay differs in dignity,
And blood of your begetting.
His absolute commission. Long live Caesar!
Worthy the pressing--lies a mole, right proud
Been less, and so more equal ballasting
He was expected then,
First, make yourself but like one.
Hath not deserved my service nor your loves,
Married your royalty, was wife to your place,
Than they are to their virtues, which is nothing.
For whom my heart drops blood, and my false spirits
The fit and apt construction of thy name,
Here are letters for you.
Pays dear for my offences.
With language that would make me spurn the sea,
Ha!
Such thoughts and such, or I could make him swear
grieve thee,
The noise is round about us.
And he her dieter.
My crack'd one to more care. Have with you, boys!
Known but by letter: thither write, my queen,
yours: provided I have your commendation for my more
Be pleased awhile.
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar--
How now, Pisanio!
Though you, it seems, come from the fliers.
At three and two years old, I stole these babes,
You put me to forget a lady's manners,
derogation in't?
Your loss your sport: I hope you know that we
One of your lordship's pages.
your sword.
Thou hast look'd thyself into my grace,
I would this music would come: I am advised to give
I will report, so please you: these her women
Behold their quarter'd fires, have both their eyes
More evident than this, for this was stolen.
The villain would not stand me.
Love's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing,
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found
Must be supplyant: the words of your commission
As little as a crow, or less, ere left
Hanging is the word, sir: if
Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.
You cannot derogate, my lord.
Still going?
Exceeding pleasant, none a stranger there
'Twixt hour and hour?
Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
I fear 'twill be revenged:
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes
Prithee, fair youth,
Come to the matter.
O, get thee from my sight,
No more, thou thunder-master, show
He had two sons: if this be worth your hearing,
We must forbear: here comes the gentleman,
Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than
This is he,
Madam, you're best consider.
In you, which I account his beyond all talents,
Whom best I love I cross, to make my gift,
Success to the Roman host.
With scraps o' the court, it is no contract, none:
A man worth any woman, overbuys me
What! how! how!
To the smothering of the sense--how far it is
Protects not us: then why should we be tender
I will not.
Is now due debt. To the grave!
Thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken that
Enter CLOTEN
Your highness
The present power of life, but in short time
He is in Rome.
this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all
Enter IACHIMO
In embassy to his mother: his body's hostage
The strides they victors made: and now our cowards,
Than to work any. Will you rhyme upon't,
which else an easy battery might lay flat, for
'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
late master's garments in thy possession?
It is no act of common passage, but
To have saved their carcasses! took heel to do't,
I can with ease produce.
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion,
She would not lose it: her attendants are
What of him? he is
Enter IMOGEN
Render to me some corporal sign about her,
Embracing him
Exeunt Musicians
Exit
The brawns of Hercules: but his Jovial face
Exit
Thy mind to her is now as low as were
Chickens, the way which they stoop'd eagles, slaves,
Of these Italian weeds and suit myself
have made to her chastity you shall answer me with
What's his name and birth?
O, content thee.
some that take upon them to know, or do take upon
Not too hot:
Partition make with spectacles so precious
offence to my inferiors.
Damn'd in the first beginners!--gan to look
Here comes the Briton: let him be so entertained
And had, besides this gentleman in question,
It was much like an argument that fell out last
Who is 't can read a woman? Is there more?
My hunger's gone, but even before, I was
'Two boys, an old man twice a boy, a lane,
I embrace these conditions, let us have articles
Had lived to put on this: so had you saved
Exeunt
Desired more than constrain'd: to satisfy,
From chance to chance: but nor the time nor place
Or I, whate'er it be,
Personates thee: and thy lopp'd branches point
Exit
When we are old as you? when we shall hear
Or in my life what comfort, when I am
More slavish did I ne'er than answering
Beseech you, sir, desire
The fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good
What an infinite mock is this, that a man should
To have mistrusted her: yet, O my daughter!
Of angry eyes, not comforted to live,
Deserves your pity?
To the king's party there's no going: newness
He'll then instruct us of this body. Young one,
She prized it once.
As, to seek through the regions of the earth
This is her honour!
Die of this folly!
mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness of your
A Roman with a Roman's heart can suffer:
Of what we blame him for.
But the worst of me. So, I leave you, sir,
The violets, cowslips, and the primroses,
But fear the sword like me, he'll scarcely look on't.
Whither bound?
that honour of hers which you imagine so reserved.
Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio,--
Harm not yourself with your vexation
Fear no more the heat o' the sun,
'Tis he and Cloten: malice and lucre in them
Adder, Spider,
I have the placing of the British crown.
Quake in the present winter's state and wish
That I return'd with simular proof enough
And now 'tis up again: it must be married
To taint his nobler heart and brain
Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp,
The evils she hatch'd were not effected, so
the breach of hers. Let thine own hands take away
Great Jupiter be praised! Lucius is taken.
A cell of ignorance, travelling a-bed,
Thou art welcome, Caius.
My man's abode where I did leave him: he
him accordingly, as you value your trust--
So slight a valuation, should reserve
I'll make't my comfort
To keep her chamber.
And let us, Polydore, though now our voices
Camest thou from where they made the stand?
Do their due functions. Have you ta'en of it?
As 'tis no better reckon'd, but of those
From Leonati seat, and cast
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured
The pangs of barr'd affections, though the king
And then a mind put in't, either our brags
Hail, heaven!
Made me a counterfeit: yet my mother seem'd
Of many a bold one, whose kinsmen have made suit
Meet thee at Milford-Haven!--I forgot to ask him one
The hands of Romans!
Would he had been one of my rank!
We'll slip you for a season, but our jealousy
I have stol'n nought, nor would not, though I had found
And shalt be ever.
Fairness which strikes the eye--
Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight,
Mine honour'd lady!
Bind the offender,
That have this golden chance and know not why.
I having ta'en the forfeit. Whereupon--
That now thou tirest on, how thy memory
Have turn'd mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio,
night, where each of us fell in praise of our
And take him from our presence.
Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding,
Each object with a joy: the counterchange
Will play the cook and servant, 'tis our match:
If I do lie and do
To Milford-Haven.
Which is our honour, bitter torture shall
To the worst of discontent.
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Exit Lord
I have consider'd of a course. Good lady,
O, good my lord!
To lose so bad employment, in the which
You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers
Appear unkinglike.
No less beloved. The Roman emperor's letters,
it would have run all out.
But that you shall not say I yield being silent,
What shall I need to draw my sword? the paper
That have a sharper known, well corresponding
No, I rather added
Than those for preservation cased, or shame--
'Lack, good youth!
To inlay heaven with stars.
She'll home to her father: and provide me presently
Postures beyond brief nature, for condition,
Under the conduct of bold Iachimo,
Proceed.
Day, my lord.
Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages:
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
She holds her virtue still and I my mind.
His perishing root with the increasing vine!
It was his queen, his queen!
And bless the good remainders of the court! I am gone.
The remedy then born--discover to me
As great as is thy master, greater, for
[Kneeling]               Your blessing, sir.
I will wage against your gold, gold to it: my ring
will not use them.
I am sorry for't, my lord.
Who shall take notice of thee: I'll move the king
I'll choke myself: there's all I'll do for you.
Sir, as I think.
What's best to ask. Know'st him thou look'st on? speak,
calves'-guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to
Howsoe'er 'tis strange,
Solemn music
There wants no diligence in seeking him,
Leonatus! a banished rascal, and he's another,
I was confederate with the Romans: so
By the sure physician, death, who is the key
Of thy assault: if he shall think it fit,
In simple and low things to prince it much
And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine
Where's my brother?
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
Subdues all pangs, all fears.
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Most like,
Still seem as does the king.
nobody can match.
To hunt this day: the boy Fidele's sickness
On him, her brother, me, her master, hitting
Her husband banish'd, she imprison'd: all
Thou wrong'st a gentleman, who is as far
a trunk in one corner of it.
Those that I reverence those I fear, the wise:
Son, let your mother end.
Comes from my lord with letters.
Corrupters of my faith! you shall no more
Fear it not, sir: I would I were so sure
Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord!
As I have given out him. My sons, I must,
in his own chamber--I mean, the lines of my body are
Were not in fault, for she was beautiful,
Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him
More noble than that runagate to your bed,
I nothing know where she remains, why gone,
Exit an Attendant
A prince's courage. Away, I prithee.
Stronger than ever law could make: this secret
Is Cadwal mad?
A saucy stranger in his court to mart
O blest, that I might not! I chose an eagle,
Could never go so slow: I have heard of
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? find
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you
for any lady in Britain. If she went before others
How I would think on him at certain hours
Answering the letter of the oracle,
Mine ears, that heard her flattery, nor my heart,
To note the chamber: I will write all down:
Amen: I thank thee.
I will go there and do't, i' the court, before
I have sent Cloten's clotpoll down the stream,
The duty of the day: she looks us like
So sure as you your father's. I, old Morgan,
To come! O, give me cord, or knife, or poison,
I do well believe you.
If she be up, I'll speak with her, if not,
Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio!
A prison for a debtor, that not dares
That headless man
To leave you in your madness, 'twere my sin:
I'll hide my master from the flies, as deep
Exit an Attendant
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them,
Where Philomel gave up. I have enough:
Quail to remember--Give me leave, I faint.
Best draw my sword: and if mine enemy
His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent.
Some falls are means the happier to arise.
Even to the note o' the king, or I'll fall in them.
Let me end the story:
I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed,
You health. So please you, sir.
What should I say? he was too good to be
A very valiant Briton and a good,
With wild wood-leaves and weeds I ha' strew'd his grave,
Stepp'd before larges of proof, cannot be found:
More pious debts to heaven than in all
constantly thou hast stuck to the bare fortune of
That I should seem to lack humanity
Answer'd my steps too loud.
it did not speak before. All solemn things
He came in thunder, his celestial breath
That we shall make in time, from our hence-going
What pain it cost, what danger. God's!
Come as the gods foresay it: howsoe'er,
By lengthening my return. From Gallia
In my good brother's fault: I know not why
But brats and beggary, in self-figured knot,
I'll give but notice you are dead and send him
preserve it from tainting: but I see you have some
The forlorn soldier, that so nobly fought,
Hath left mine arm: it was thy master's: 'shrew me,
And Britons strut with courage.
Perplex'd in all. The heavens still must work.
And this you might have heard of here, by me,
Had answer'd him.
Could best express how slow his soul sail'd on,
Not any, but abide the change of time,
'Tis the ninth hour o' the morn.
The battle continues, the Britons fly, CYMBELINE is  taken: then enter, to his rescue, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
And rather father thee than master thee.
Nor the furious winter's rages,
For idiots in this case of favour would
Is certain falling, or so slippery that
Wherefore then
Almost, sir: heaven restore me! Would I were
Is yet fresh in their grief.
That their good souls may be appeased with slaughter
Here are your sons again, and I must lose
SCENE I. Britain. The garden of Cymbeline's palace.
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles
Sir, be patient:
A narrow lane, an old man, and two boys.
Profess myself the winner of her honour,
Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
That most desired the match, but not a courtier,
Lady,
More valour in me than my habits show.
The precious note of it with a base slave.
Go see my lord aboard: for this time leave me.
Thinking to bar thee of succession, as
Among the bands--may drive us to a render
It is a day turn'd strangely: or betimes
Sir, I will.
And, not dispraising whom we praised,--therein
SCENE V. A room in Cymbeline's palace.
Nor hear I from my mistress who did promise
I draw the sword myself: take it, and hit
We should not, when the blood was cool,
Which I so often owe: but your ring first,
Disdaining me and throwing favours on
Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me
With honour to maintain.
But even the very middle of my heart
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow,
One sand another
Is bound for Italy, he embark'd at Milford,
Where there's another man: the vows of women
she your jewel, this your jewel, and my gold are
I would not speak. I pray you, spare me: 'faith,
bitterness of it I now belch from my heart--that she
Sir, my circumstances,
As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you,
your lordship. You are most hot and furious when you win.
O master! what a strange infection
And we will fear no poison, which attends
Consider, sir, the chance of war: the day
You'll go with us?
Imogen, Imogen!
That which, to appear itself, must not yet be
I see before me, man: nor here, nor here,
And yet enrich'd it too: she gave it me, and said
And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
Wherefore eyest him so?
Unlike than this thou tell'st. I lost my children:
From her his dearest one,
And by a stranger!--No, he hath enjoyed her:
His brows within a golden crown and call'd
You here at Milford-Haven with your ships:
So children temporal fathers do appease,
Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,
O thou goddess,
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.
Of secret on her person, that he could not
Mingle their spurs together.
For barbarous and unnatural revolts
May be she pluck'd it off
Doctor, your service for this time is ended,
happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and your,
Thou wast within a ken: O Jove! I think
All too soon I shall,
Another stain, as big as hell can hold,
Exeunt LUCIUS and Lords
Pray, what is't?
Let's see the boy's face.
What do you esteem it at?
Are men more order'd than when Julius Caesar
For Imogen's dear life take mine, and though
The tale of Tereus, here the leaf's turn'd down
First, a very excellent good-conceited thing,
Enter two British Captains and Soldiers
Absolute madness could so far have raved
As a wren's eye, fear'd gods, a part of it!
As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
O dearest soul! your cause doth strike my heart
Find such another master.
And our good his.
No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter,
As I had made my meal, and parted
Would I could free't!
Yes, I beseech, or I shall short my word
are betray'd
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war:
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Remember me at court, where I was taught
We'll speak it, then.
Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far,
That nothing-gift of differing multitudes--
With tokens thus, and thus, averting notes
I'd change my sex to be companion with them,
But you shall do no harm.
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Pretty and full of view, yea, haply, near
That promise noble service: and they come
Know'st me not by my clothes?
And brings the dire occasion in his arms
And thou, Posthumus, thou that didst set up
Big of this gentleman our theme, deceased
Re-enter QUEEN
A pain that only seems to seek out danger
Wake and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve:
For my peculiar care. This one thing only
Who hath upon him still that natural stamp:
I thought you would not back again.
Where there is beauty, truth, where semblance, love,
Drawn on with torture.
Augustus lives to think on't: and so much
But Imogen is your own: do your best wills,
That play with all infirmities for gold
As easily 'gainst our rocks: for joy whereof
[Aside]  I wish not so, unless it had been the fall
How you speak!
She's far enough, and what he learns by this
Thou hast lost by this a kingdom.
Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee
I have surely seen him:
And leaving so his service, follow you,
That you have tasted her in bed, my hand
Our valour is to chase what flies, our cage
The lane is guarded: nothing routs us but
Thersites' body is as good as Ajax',
play the workman. I dare speak it to myself--for it
Can it not do and undo? I will make
Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray, your pardon.
casual, a cunning thief, or a that way accomplished
Puts to him all the learnings that his time
When shall we see again?
directly and truly, I would think thee an honest
With the next benefit o' the wind.
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I,
You tender to her, that you in all obey her,
I mean, that married her, alack, good man!
[To IMOGEN]	Brother, stay here
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier,
back, will I ravish her: first kill him, and in her
A man already.
up thus meanly
Like a full-acorn'd boar, a German one,
Take your own way.
Made me to blame in memory.
Though Rome be therefore angry: Mulmutius made our laws,
That lock up your restraint. For you, Posthumus,
spectators, the dish pays the shot.
and too much too.
With horror, madly dying, like her life,
When once he was mature for man,
Royal sir,
Let what is here contain'd relish of love,
Prithee, have done,
So long a poor unknown.
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us,
What monster's her accuser? Leonatus,
The residence of Posthumus, so nigh at least
We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story,
Exeunt POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and Messenger
The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated
Were in his time thought false, and Sinon's weeping
How now, my flesh, my child!
Thus far, and so farewell.
'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp,
If you'll go fetch him,
Charms this report out.
Of mine own kindred: when I waked, I found
That draw his knives i' the war. Well, I will find him
strumpet in my bed, the testimonies whereof lie
Most like a noble lord in love and one
Enter a Lady
but duteous, and true preferment shall tender itself
think, to liberty: yet am I better
persuasion, and I doubt not you sustain what you're
Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods
I'll follow, sir. But first, an't please the gods,
and by such two that would by all likelihood have
him so pictured: you must either be directed by
We'll talk of that hereafter. Prithee, speak,
[Reads]  'He is one of the noblest note, to whose
kingdom is stronger than it was at that time, and,
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. Stand,
That kill'd thy daughter:--villain-like, I lie--
The action of my life is like it, which
I thought had been my lord.
Unknown to you, unsought, were clipp'd about
I'll speak to thee in silence.
With tapesty of silk and silver, the story
being made,
To any shape of thy preferment such
We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as
Spare your arithmetic: never count the turns,
Or what his death will bring us.
That though his actions were not visible, yet
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
Enter PISANIO
She stripp'd it from her arm, I see her yet,
Is there no way for men to be but women
And on it said a century of prayers,
That will be given to the loudest noise we make.
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steer'd.
Poor ignorant baubles!-- upon our terrible seas,
Whom thou didst banish, and--which more may
Thou diedst, a most rare boy, of melancholy.
[Aside]  No, 'faith, not so much as his patience.
The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them
I'll be revenged:
It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it,
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
No companies abroad?
Appear'd to me, with other spritely shows
To die with lengthen'd shame.
Happy be you!
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
Is the desire that's glorious: blest be those,
Can justly boast of. What's your lordship's pleasure?
That he deserved the praise o' the world,
Be villany less than 'twas! O Imogen!
To be exiled, and thrown
To BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
Stand, stand! We have the advantage of the ground,
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Your wisdom may inform you.
For my confections? Having thus far proceeded,--
Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake:
The hand-fast to her lord. I have given him that
Take or lend. Ho! No answer? Then I'll enter.
My purpose would prove well. It cannot be
From the spongy south to this part of the west,
Sparkles this stone as it was wont? or is't not
The walls of thy dear honour, keep unshaked
Ay,
Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior, I
What companies are near: pray you, away,
Of common-kissing Titan, and forget
I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo
ring may be stolen too: so your brace of unprizable
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!
In the election of a sir so rare,
Our fealty and Tenantius' right
With those legions
Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for,
And himself. Not I,
We must extend our notice. Our dear son,
for light, else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.
Exeunt all but PISANIO
Sky-planted batters all rebelling coasts?
When you were there?
And she alone were cold: whereat I, wretch,
He not respects at all. What, ho, Pisanio!
this youth, I blame ye not:
Unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young
Of the king's look's, hath a heart that is not
Motion and breath left out.
Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
what's spoken, I swear.
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Good morrow, fairest: sister, your sweet hand.
Brother, farewell.
'Tis not sleepy business,
I could not miss my way: will poor folks lie,
'Twixt fair and foul?
Upon my banishment: I moved her to't,
His skill in the construction.
Be those the garments?
Which daily she was bound to proffer: this
I'll thither: what thing is it that I never
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
A pantler, not so eminent.
get this foolish Imogen, I should have gold enough.
Unless I add, we are honest.
Is not this boy revived from death?
Have,' said she, 'given his mistress that confection
And never false. Soft, ho! what trunk is here
Or dead, or sleeping on him? But dead rather,
But yield me to the veriest hind that shall
No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope
This is a thing
you shall speed in your journey's end, I think you'll
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus:
O' the floor,
Striking her: she falls
And deal with others better.
Nor feel him where he struck: being an ugly monster,
[Waking]  Sleep, thou hast been a grandsire, and begot
Of their dispatch.
He served with glory and admired success,
As strongly as the conscience does within,
You look on me: what wreck discern you in me
With winds that sailors rail at.
Quite besides
The graces for his merits due,
He is but one: you and my brother search
But kiss, one kiss! Rubies unparagon'd,
Art not afeard?
'Ods pittikins! can it be six mile yet?--
Revenged!
I saw him not these many years, and yet
And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend
wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.
To have them fall no more: you some permit
Enter IMOGEN and PISANIO
The gentry to this business. He creates
Should yield the world this ass! a woman that
I'll attend your lordship.
Exeunt POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and IACHIMO
I would have broke mine eye-strings, crack'd them, but
Shakes all our buds from growing.
Except she bend her humour, shall be assured
been vicious
That paragon, thy daughter,--
There vanish'd in the sunbeams: which portends--
If it be so to do good service, never
To pay our wonted tribute, from the which
I'll give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens,
It is great morning. Come, away!--
without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of
creditor but it, of what's past, is, and to come,
Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet
The herbs that have on them cold dew o' the night
[Aside]  No, but he fled forward still, toward your face.
That had a court no bigger than this cave,
The king his father call'd Guiderius,--Jove!
Be touch'd at very heart.
It was my instant death. By accident,
My conscience bids me ask--wherefore you have
My lord, when last I went to visit her,
I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' the haven,
Out-sweeten'd not thy breath: the ruddock would,
I do not bid thee beg my life, good lad,
To the majestic cedar join'd, whose issue
Presenting a letter
And hear him mock the Frenchman. But, heavens know,
Change you, madam?
That from me was Posthumus ript,
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
vouching--and upon warrant of bloody
Nor no witchcraft charm thee!
All that good time will give us: this attempt
Alas, good lady!
A heavy reckoning for you, sir. But the comfort is,
Which chance to find us: O, my lord, my lord!
This gentleman, whom I call Polydore,
This is but a custom in your tongue, you bear a
What should we speak of
Enter IMOGEN
As great Sicilius' heir.
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm.
That mend upon the world.
and so, away: no further with your din
Reads
Posthumus, thy head, which now is growing upon thy
for yours.
It cannot be i' the eye, for apes and monkeys
From this most bravest vessel of the world
I hold dear as my finger, 'tis part of it.
Did you e'er meet?
What I shall think is good?--The princess!
Come on, away: apart upon our knees.
Till he have cross'd the Severn. Happiness!
A second night of such sweet shortness which
He was paid for that: though mean and
For you must be our housewife.
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
To bring him here alone, although perhaps
be a torment to her contempt. He on the ground, my
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford-Haven
A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh
A lustre to it.
He that hath lost her too, so is the queen,
Mine interest and his honour, or have charged him,
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,
If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me:
The case stands with her, do't as from thyself.
An earthly paragon! Behold divineness
Into my story: say 'Thus, mine enemy fell,
Was call'd Belarius.
Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain: he was
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
By tasting of our wrath? How of descent
And your three motives to the battle, with
Direct you to the best!
Fitting my bounty and thy state, I'll give it,
What art thou?
And take your ring again, 'tis not yet won:
you be ready for that, you are well cooked.
'His garment!'
To load thy merit richly. Call my women:
You had of her pure honour gains or loses
To the shining synod of the rest
O, for such means!
Had ever scar for.
But must be look'd to speedily and strongly.
Was as another nature, dumb, outwent her,
Very true,
What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
Of no esteem: I, dreading that her purpose
With five times so much conversation, I should get
Of her or you, having proceeded but
What's that?
Thou art a robber,
Exit IMOGEN, to the cave
The chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
Who knows if one of her women, being corrupted,
And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.
To enjoy thy banish'd lord and this great land!
Enter POSTHUMUS, with a bloody handkerchief
To seem to die ere sick: so please you, leave me,
The fall'n-off Britons, that we do incite
Which we have done, whose answer would be death
Perfumes the chamber thus: the flame o' the taper
I must aboard to-morrow.
The lamb entreats the butcher: where's thy knife?
conscience, there are verier knaves desire to live,
When I was but your sister, I you brothers,
O the gods!
Son to the queen, after his own report,
starve: I will fetch my gold and have our two
Had I this cheek
The gods throw stones of sulphur on me, if
Knocks
But when to my good lord I prove untrue,
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
And though you took his life, as being our foe,
With blue of heaven's own tinct. But my design,
Good madam, hear me.
So fair, and fasten'd to an empery,
[Aside]  I do not like her. She doth think she has
Was nothing but mutation, ay, and that
Our temple was he married. Rise, and fade.
I barely gratify your love, they failing,
And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charm'd,
Do you call me fool?
Even out of your report. But, pray you, tell me,
The woman's, flattering, hers, deceiving, hers,
Is he at home?
Is this: she hath bought the name of whore
To royalty unlearn'd, honour untaught,
The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Briton--
And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore,
With their own nobleness, which could have turn'd
I have heard of such. What slave art thou?
Let me hear no more.
Why I should yield to thee?
About some half-hour hence,
Exit
Not knowing why.
Where folly now possesses? Do thou work:
By your leave, ho!
Were deeply rooted, and shall make your lord,
Exit BELARIUS
This man is better than the man he slew,
Than some, whose tailors are as dear as yours,
I am senseless of your wrath, a touch more rare
Were to prove false, which I will never be,
I know not how a traitor.
We will discharge our duty.
Save when command to your dismission tends,
Or we are Romans and will give you that
As I my poor self did exchange for you,
To lie in watch there and to think on him?
First pay me for the nursing of thy sons,
Then, sir,
I mean, to man, he had not apprehension
Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth, and in
Will my lord say so?
But in a fainter kind:--O, not like me,
With Roman swords, and my report was once
Peace, peace! see further, he eyes us not, forbear,
As well descended as thyself, and hath
Farewell, you're angry.
Are they not but in Britain? I' the world's volume
The penitent instrument to pick that bolt,
Thou shouldst be colour'd thus. You married ones,
Ay.
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in 't,
thy face: and all this done, spurn her home to her
courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.
Thanks, fairest lady.
Both fill'd and running, ravening first the lamb
religion in you, that you fear.
'Twould move me sooner.
Yes, indeed do I, fellow.
I stand on fire:
From so divine a temple, to commix
To walk this way: I never do him wrong,
For that which I did then: beaten for loyalty
Be henceforth treacherous! Damn'd Pisanio
Take not away the taper, leave it burning,
Prove false!
Go, look after.
Enter the QUEEN, POSTHUMUS LEONATUS, and IMOGEN
Moulded the stuff so fair,
With a most false effect, and I the truer,
A drug of such damn'd nature. Those she has
In workmanship and value, which I wonder'd
Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till your
Vanquish my staider senses. What's the matter?
Re-enter CLOTEN
There's other work in hand: I see a thing
My tailor made them not.
As well might poison poison! Be revenged,
Play judge and executioner all himself,
Syenna's brother.
Thou took'st a beggar, wouldst have made my throne
His only child.
Is to exchange one misery with another,
You are a great deal abused in too bold a
'Mongst friends,
Mark it: the eldest of them at three years old,
issues, being foolish, do not derogate.
Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,
She is alone the Arabian bird, and I
To dinner presently.
is not vain-glory for a man and his glass to confer
Ay, it is fit for your lordship only.
Exit
To death with mortal joy.
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
Let ordinance
Shall be so ever.
I'm not their father, yet who this should be,
O Cymbeline! heaven and my conscience knows
So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers,
Good ancestors.
lopped branches, which, being dead many years,
Which, by their graces, I will keep.
To the oath of loyalty, this object, which
I thank you for your pains:
These herblets shall, which we upon you strew.
Are arch'd so high that giants may jet through
That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce,
You'll give me leave to spare, when you shall find
gentleman, whom I commend to you as a noble friend
to extend him, be it but to fortify her judgment,
Did call my father, was I know not where
If these be they, I know not how to wish
Might easiliest harbour in? Thou blessed thing!
Re-enter BELARIUS and ARVIRAGUS
He shall be happy that can find him, if
It is a recreation to be by
The queen, madam,
SCENE I. Wales: near the cave of Belarius.
more tavern-bills, which are often the sadness of
To Cymbeline perform'd:
He never can meet more mischance than come
Reposing on a cushion.
Have patience, sir,
As hard to leave as keep, whose top to climb
Not as death's dart, being laugh'd at, his
From fairies and the tempters of the night
For it doth physic love: of his content,
You felt than make't my boast.
The Apparitions vanish
Laud we the gods,
That our great king himself doth woo me oft
Do as I bid thee: there's no more to say,
To this same blessed Milford: and by the way
Go bid my woman feign a sickness, say
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
I' the bottom of a cowslip: here's a voucher,
Hath too much mangled, whose repair and franchise
The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shaped
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
Exeunt
Where, I confess, I slept not, but profess
comparison--had been something too fair and too good
That thy adulteries
Tongue and brain not, either both or nothing,
Whom heavens, in justice, both on her and hers,
This yellow Iachimo, in an hour,--wast not?--
Than doth become a man. I will remain
Yet bury him as a prince.
Which I gave him for cordial, she is served
On chaliced flowers that lies,
That box I gave you was not thought by me
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir,
I am perfect what: cut off one Cloten's head,
But we saw him dead.
Yea, and furr'd moss besides, when flowers are none,
You need it not.
quit. O, the charity of a penny cord! It sums up
Ere I arise, I will prefer my sons,
Speak, Iachimo: I had you down and might
Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abused
reflection should hurt her.
Excited me to treason: their dear loss,
To her desired Posthumus: gone she is
By being so verbal: and learn now, for all,
Had been my father's sons! then had my prize
In this sad wreck? How came it? Who is it?
I'll have this secret from thy heart, or rip
As when thou grew'st thyself.
This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds
His radiant root. Away! and, to be blest,
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.
As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard!
Having received the punishment before,
Are sometimes like our judgments, blind. Good faith,
Hath heard of great Augustus: Caius Lucius
No servant of thy master's. Against self-slaughter
By whom I grant she lives. 'Tis now the time
I'll rob none but myself, and let me die,
No tidings of him?
Would I had done't
Your lord, myself and other noble friends,
With aptness of the season, make denials
To be depender on a thing that leans,
Is oft the cause of fear. But, see, thy brother.
In eye of Imogen, that best
I have gone all night. 'Faith, I'll lie down and sleep.
We'll leave you for this time: go in and rest.
He'll grant the tribute, send the arrearages,
A mother and two brothers: but, O scorn!
To look upon him, till the diminution
And to the Roman empire, promising
Who needs must know of her departure and
Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less
And yet are steep'd in favours: so am I,
Yet you are curb'd from that enlargement by
The goer-back. Why came you from your master?
Since, Jupiter, our son is good,
That answer to them: would you in their serving,
Civility not seen from other, valour
That's all I reck.
A madness, of which her life's in danger. Heavens,
She writes so to you, doth she?
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
And pawn mine honour for their safety: since
Is every breath a death, and thus, unknown,
And will, no doubt, be found.
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to the ground,
Than priests and fanes that lie.
Who of their broken debtors take a third,
I beseech you, sir,
Hail, great king!
A child that guided dotards, to his mistress,
As prouder livers do.
What both you spur and stop.
My lord,
A worthy fellow,
With this most tender air.
Why stands he so perplex'd?
Which your own coffers yield! with diseased ventures
Were there no more but it.
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan call'd,
His war for Britain.
Presents a letter
He goes hence frowning: but it honours us
The senate hath stirr'd up the confiners
Breeds him and makes him of his bed-chamber,
Upon your never-withering banks of flowers:
Exit
consider your music the better: if it do not, it is
That from pay mutest conscience to my tongue
No more a Briton, I have resumed again
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.
that I have sent her, by her own command
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS
And conquer'd it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,--
My lady's honour: what became of him
To see your grace.
That he quit being, and his gentle lady,
And with what imitation you can borrow
Fear not slander, censure rash,
With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.
The time is troublesome.
Many dream not to find, neither deserve,
Grew shameless-desperate, open'd, in despite
Than to be sure they do, for certainties
And praise myself for charity.
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!
Which he to seek of me again, perforce,
If quiet life be best, sweeter to you
Draws us a profit from all things we see,
And gentlemen of Italy, most willing spirits,
The Britons have razed out, though with the loss
Unless my sins abuse my divination--
An ante-chamber adjoining Imogen's apartments.
which I will add
For purchasing but trouble, the thanks I give
The country base than to commit such slaughter
Fidele, sir.
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'st
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad,
No further service, doctor,
Glad at the thing they scowl at.
And set them on Lud's-town.
That's fed with stinking tallow, it were fit
ACT III
From the inward of thee? One, but painted thus,
Mine eyes
But I will prove that two on's are as good
I am in heaven for him, or ere I could
jack, upon an up-cast to be hit away! I had a
Have skipp'd from sixteen years of age to sixty,
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
Exeunt BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
Country call'd his! and you his mistress, only
And not protract with admiration what
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry,
Sir,
Hast here cut off my lord. To write and read
O most delicate fiend!
Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here,
Please you, read,
These boys know little they are sons to the king,
We are all undone.
As I do love my father.
Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine:
And that was all?
And winds of all the comers kiss'd your sails,
To be his evidence now.
notwithstanding, I fear not my ring.
So, sir.
I will be known your advocate: marry, yet
Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies,
CYMBELINE
To see the enclosed lights, now canopied
When you have given good morning to your mistress,
A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth,
Will this hold, think you?
I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to
You have put me into rhyme.
Through a straight lane, the enemy full-hearted,
My boys,
The malice towards you to forgive you: live,
could behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.
Your hand, my lord.
Which way they went.
For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse
at Milford-Haven: what your own love will out of
With pity, that doth make me sick. A lady
They crave to be demanded. Who is this
And be her sense but as a monument,
Receive it friendly, but from this time forth
acquaintance?
And fit you to your manhood. May the gods
Have made you finish.
I will attend the queen.
So think of your estate.
sorry that you are paid too much, purse and brain
Please you, madam
Forbear sharp speeches to her: she's a lady
To know from whence we are.
SONG
Hath alter'd that good picture? What's thy interest
Enter two Gentlemen
Make no collection of it: let him show
[Awaking]  Yes, sir, to Milford-Haven, which is
I see a man's life is a tedious one:
His arms thus leagued: I thought he slept, and put
Sweet Imogen?
A stranger, and I not know on't!
The soldier that did company these three
I am merrier to die than thou art to live.
mistress enforced, thy garments cut to pieces before
In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
A day's work in him. What shalt thou expect,
With labour, then by-peeping in an eye
Thy spite on mortal flies:
man: thou shouldst neither want my means for thy
The gods protect you!
We have been too slight in sufferance.
So 'tis reported:
That first that ever touch'd him--he was carried
He is a man, I'll love him as my brother:
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed.
Be brief, I pray you:
And would so, had it been a carbuncle
From east to occident, cry out for service,
Is yet to name the winner: fare you well.
Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.
Can make good use of either: she being down,
have been often bound for no less than my life.
as since he hath been allowed the name of, but I
Take him hence:
Do thou thy master's bidding: when thou see'st him,
Senseless Linen! happier therein than I!
As fearful as a siege.
Poor sick Fidele!
counters, so the acquittance follows.
Out of your best advice.
And question'dst every sail: if he should write
That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how
That's more
Strikes life into my speech and shows much more
Sons,
ACT I
Enter a Messenger
This is not hunters' language: he that strikes
Even to Augustus' throne.
slight and trivial a nature.
you're ready:
I cannot tell: long is it since I saw him,
A neat-herd's daughter, and my Leonatus
His rage can do on me: you must be gone,
For such and so they are--these twenty years
We'll learn our freeness of a son-in-law,
Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and her brain
If you keep covenant. Had I not brought
Thus in a chapel lying! Come off, come off:
To him that is most true. To Milford go,
That late he married--hath referr'd herself
Thou comest not, Caius, now for tribute that
Thou divine Nature, how thyself thou blazon'st
In place of greater state. I'll meet you in the valleys.
Deny't again.
You heavenly blessings, on her! This fool's speed
No elder than a boy!
He purposed to his wife's sole son--a widow
Nay, let her languish
Of chamber-hanging, pictures, this her bracelet,--
With joy he will embrace you, for he's honourable
I know you are more clement than vile men,
Must be half-workers? We are all bastards,
Upon his honour'd finger, to attain
We make a quire, as doth the prison'd bird,
Bear to my closet. Fare thee well, Pisanio,
equally to me disloyal.'
This gentleman, my Cadwal, Arviragus,
O happy Leonatus! I may say
Why tender'st thou that paper to me, with
False to his bed! What is it to be false?
Recoil from your great stock.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatch'd.
But suck them up to the topmast. A kind of conquest
By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no
Sell me your good report.
Fie! you must give way.
He hath a drug of mine, I pray his absence
fingering, so, we'll try with tongue too: if none
So merry and so gamesome: he is call'd
not hurt: it is a thoroughfare for steel, if it be not hurt.
excelled many: but I have not seen the most
The bird is dead
Ourselves to be.
May bare the raven's eye! I lodge in fear,
Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act
Let proof speak.
This is a lord! O noble misery,
Doth ill deserve by doing well, what's worse,
Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? thy friend?
riding wagers,
Thus did he answer me: yet said, hereafter
That possible strength might meet, would seek us through
We are beastly, subtle as the fox for prey,
And all the other by-dependencies,
Is jollity for apes and grief for boys.
Let it be granted you have seen all this--and praise
Upon the number'd beach? and can we not
Sayest thou?
LEONATUS.'
Against my lady's kingdom: 'tis enough
His mistress' picture, which by his tongue
Our peace we'll ratify, seal it with feasts.
That gave the affront with them.
To a morning's holy office: the gates of monarchs
He will remain so.
If you will take this audit, take this life,
Or fruitful object be
words him, I doubt not, a great deal from the matter.
[Aside]  As many inches as you have oceans. Puppies!
You do seem to know
Till the tree die!
I wish my brother make good time with him,
A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer
But though slow, deadly?
Boys, we'll go dress our hunt. Fair youth, come in:
We'll say our song the whilst. Brother, begin.
The riches of it: do his bidding, strike
Peace, my lord, hear, hear--
villain Posthumus, will I kill thee. I would these
The worthy Leonatus is in safety
Exeunt all but CLOTEN
Last night the very gods show'd me a vision--
Was there ever man had such luck! when I kissed the
mine: wilt thou serve me?
Putting on the ring
I tell thee, fellow, there are none want eyes to
Hence, then, and thank
Two other sons, who in the wars o' the time
As in a Romish stew and to expound
A world by itself, and we will nothing pay
Are landed on your coast, with a supply
What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it
Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which
Enter CLOTEN
Who had not now been drooping here, if seconds
The flower that's like thy face, pale primrose, nor
To entreat your grace but in a small request,
Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings,
One, two, three: time, time!
In my profession? Knighthoods and honours, borne
Is nobler than attending for a cheque,
Where we have lived, and so extort from's that
And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen!
I pray you, sir,
Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.
Becomes thee well enough.
A fever with the absence of her son,
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
Thou bring'st good news, I am called to be made free.
Welcome, sir.
I am loath to beat thee.
By wounding his belief in her renown
'Twixt two such shes would chatter this way and
O, no, no.
No, on my life.
Exit
You speak of him when he was less furnished than now
nor crop the ears of them.
He shall be lord of lady Imogen,
Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save,
confounded one the other, or have fallen both.
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son,
Ay, and the approbation of those that weep this
Have I train'd up: those arts they have as I
But now thou seem'st a coward.
A storm or robbery, call it what you will,
Sleeps
Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit,
And that most venerable man which I
For we do fear the law? What company
There was our error.
Am something nearer.
Here is your servant. How now, sir! What news?
praised,--to the court I'll knock her back, foot
Exit
Upon my lady's missing, came to me
Enter IMOGEN, in boy's clothes
In my respect than all the hairs above thee,
Such precious deeds in one that promises nought
For further satisfying, under her breast--
pox on't! I had rather not be so noble as I am,
The one is Caius Lucius.
Accessible is none but Milford way.
let it die as it was born, and, I pray you, be
The government of patience! You have won:
He wrings at some distress.
O, that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal!
Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
It was a mark of wonder.
Let him be ransom'd: never master had
Merely through fear, that the straight pass was damm'd
Either your unparagoned mistress is dead, or she's
Enter a Lady
Let's follow him, and pervert the present wrath
I am soldier to, and will abide it with
As offer'd mercy is. What was the last
Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband,
Gentlemen, enough of this: it came in too suddenly,
Mine and your mistress! O, my lord Posthumus!
Betwixt a father by thy step-dame govern'd,
Fidele, sir.
Thou villain base,
With fairest flowers
Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt, the
Thou shalt be so well master'd, but, be sure,
That he enchants societies into him,
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains
Say, where shall's lay him?
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as
Exeunt
For if he'll do as he is made to do,
How now, my son!
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee: look
To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
That the poor soldier that so richly fought,
So far as thou wilt speak it.
Such a foe, good heavens!
Screw'd to my memory? She hath been reading late
then of a crescent note, expected to prove so worthy
I am glad I was up so late, for that's the reason I
Desires your highness' company.
Must shuffle for itself.
Most like I did, for I was dead.
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now,
And be false with them.
To the madding of her lord. On her left breast
At fools I laugh, not fear them.
From youth of such a season, 'fore noble Lucius
But keep it till you woo another wife,
Was not far off: then was I as a tree
I see you're angry:
Two creatures heartily.
Why hast thou thus adjourn'd
What do you pity, sir?
But keep that countenance still. My husband's hand!
Let her lie still and dream.
That they will waste their time upon our note,
It is an earnest of a further good
For my being absent? whereunto I never
otherwise, for your ill opinion and the assault you
Could not out-peer these twain. Pardon me, gods!
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers, revenges, hers,
All sworn and honourable:--they induced to steal it!
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
I had forgot them--were two winking Cupids
'Twixt amorous and villanous. Being thus quench'd
Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name,
But if I were as wise as honest, then
To be suspected of more tenderness
Your laboursome and dainty trims, wherein
I further know not.
Exit
Ere bloody hands were wash'd, with such a peace.
Enter IMOGEN
Exit
She will not quench and let instructions enter
Exit
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
Thou didst unjustly banish me: whereon,
We term it 'mulier:' which 'mulier' I divine
In poor beseeming, 'twas a fitment for
mighty, rotting
The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare
All the remain is 'Welcome!'
O disloyal thing,
To-day how many would have given their honours
for you, and there's an end.
Exposing it--but, O, the harder heart!
A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks,
I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring,
lady in the world.
I love this youth, and I have heard you say,
Which rare it is to do--most praised, most loved,
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS
[Aside]  He's a strange fellow himself, and knows it
When shall we hear from him?
He went hence even now.
[Aside]            All the better: may
And meet the time as it seeks us. We fear not
Set on there! Never was a war did cease,
A Gallian girl at home, he furnaces
Exeunt QUEEN and Ladies
I'll wake mine eye-balls blind first.
straight arms, none.
But that's no fault of his: we must receive him
O, my all-worthy lord!
And shall do:
The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander,
So say I	amen.
To see this vaulted arch, and the rich crop
More particulars
I had no mind
Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus
Takes off my manhood: I have belied a lady,
Upon the love and truth and vows which I
Think on my words.
Most welcome, bondage! for thou art away,
Are partners in the business.
Since the true life on't was--
To your protection I commend me, gods.
Nay, do not wonder at it: you are made
We have again. Remember, sir, my liege,
Than lady, ladies, woman, from every one
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
Should learn, being taught, forbearance.
Fixing it only here, should I, damn'd then,
And therefore banish'd--is a creature such
Gives the ring
This hath some seeming.
after, a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich
Grow, patience!
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
Hath charged you should not speak together.
Express impatience, lest you stir up mine.
See! Iachimo!
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
I'll be thy master: walk with me, speak freely.
Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat,
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
Fore-thinking this, I have already fit--
The time seems long, their blood
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
you make your voyage upon her and give me directly
Exeunt Gaolers
What kind of man he is.
So many miles with a pretence? this place?
Richard du Champ.
I wear it as your enemy.
Amongst the rarest of good ones,--sitting sadly,
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing,
Could put into them, my breeding was, sir, as
tender air, and when from a stately cedar shall be
[Aside]  His steel was in debt, it went o' the
There was no money in't: not Hercules
To be i' the field, and ask 'what news?' of me!
The kings your ancestors, together with
On whom there is no more dependency
To make your vessel nimble.
Than die ere I hear more: strive, man, and speak.
O worthiness of nature! breed of greatness!
her music o' mornings, they say it will penetrate.
That lady is not now living, or this gentleman's
The hazard therefore due fall on me by
And not o' the court of Britain.
Have made to thy command? I, her? her blood?
[Kneeling]          I am down again:
When I was stamp'd, some coiner with his tools
approbation of what I have spoke!
kindnesses I am most infinitely tied. Reflect upon
Those which I heaved to head!--the good Posthumus--
Son, I say, follow the king.
A pair of worthier sons.
This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten's: O!
And do not play in wench-like words with that
Hear patiently my purpose: I'll disrobe me
Dear lady daughter, peace! Sweet sovereign,
So, so: well done, well done:
That I regard it not.
SCENE IV. A British prison.
thousands in a trice: you have no true debitor and
You think of other place. The ambassador,
I were best not to call, I dare not call:
Himself a king.
advantage of the time, above him in birth, alike
Your very goodness and your company
The benediction of these covering heavens
Thou art straightway with the fiends.
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps,
Slight thing of Italy,
To their approvers they are people such
Jove knows what man thou mightst have made, but I,
Gone! they went hence so soon as they were born:
Discover you abroad?
To one not sociable: I am not very sick,
Who is thy grandfather: he made those clothes,
lamentable divorce under her colours are wonderfully
Do't, and to bed then.
You do not meet a man but frowns: our bloods
The mansion where!--'twas at a feast,--O, would
And pray'd me oft forbearance, did it with
I am nothing: or if not,
I'ld let a parish of such Clotens' blood,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
This is true,
To have turn'd my leaping-time into a crutch,
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee,
To win the king as I am bold her honour
put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute
Over-roasted rather, ready long ago.
Good sir, we must,
Quiet consummation have,
You're kindly welcome.
A certain stuff, which, being ta'en, would cease
O, I must, madam:
Reading
have not seen these two days.
wherein you're happy,--which you'll make him know,
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all!
I have spoke it, and I did it.
undergo those employments wherein I should have
I am thoroughly weary.
Why, one that rode to's execution, man,
I never saw him sad.
confidence than her reputation: and, to bar your
Does the world go round?
My boon is, that this gentleman may render
good troth,
That, after this strange starting from your orbs,
With such integrity, she did confess
The woman's part in me! For there's no motion
when my lust hath dined,--which, as I say, to vex
For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
How! my issue!
Assumed this age, indeed a banish'd man,
The more delay'd, delighted. Be content,
Alas, my lord,
This label on my bosom, whose containing
And lend my best attention. What's thy name?
Beseech your patience. Peace,
This bloody man, the care on't. I hope I dream,
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks
I cannot delve him to the root: his father
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing,
A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again
But what's the matter?
That we two are asunder, let that grieve him:
Some upright justicer! Thou, king, send out
nothing doubt you have store of thieves,
Be pale: I beg but leave to air this jewel, see!
Ordain'd our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar
I cannot find those runagates, that villain
Is it fit I went to look upon him? is there no
But beggary and poor looks.
Being, as it is, much spoke of.
Thyself domestic officers--thine enemy:
This youth, how'er distress'd, appears he hath had
Let me my service tender on your lips.
Why, old soldier,
So long a breeding as his white beard came to,
It is an office of the gods to venge it,
IMOGEN in bed, reading, a Lady attending
to understand you have prevailed, I am no further
thank him, makes no stranger of me, we are familiar at first.
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
Exeunt
You ne'er kill'd Imogen til now. Help, help!
And potent injuries.
gallowses! I speak against my present profit, but
The imperious seas breed monsters, for the dish
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,
Well
He'ld lay the future open. You good gods,
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
More sharp than this is.
Why, such and such, and the contents o' the story.
Did you hear of a stranger that's come to court to-night?
Which I made known to Lucius, ere the stroke
Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,
Assured bondage?'
jump the after inquiry on your own peril: and how
Stay, come not in.
I'll tell thee on the instant thou art then
Pluck a bard sentence: prithee, valiant youth,
That we have given him cause.
Who lets go by no vantages that may
thing, I'll remember't anon:--even there, thou
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen
Strains his young nerves and puts himself in posture
Is Lucius general of the forces?
Enter PHILARIO, IACHIMO, a Frenchman, a Dutchman, and a Spaniard
Exeunt, fighting
I am glad to be constrain'd to utter that
SCENE IV. Rome. Philario's house.
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
had a feigned letter of my master's
The fore-end of my time. But up to the mountains!
None in the world: you did mistake him, sure.
That which he is, new o'er: and he is one
A father to me, and thou hast created
Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up
As if he were of note: bring him to the king.
shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock and
No stricter render of me than my all.
My lord, I fear,
Proclaims how she esteem'd him and his virtue,
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base
wings to follow it! Come, and be true.
he is with that which makes him both without and within.
Thanks, royal sir.
Was as a scorpion to her sight, whose life,
Not a whit,
I beseech you all, be better known to this
The dogs o' the street to bay me: every villain
So much as but to prop him?
he must be weighed rather by her value than his own,
O, for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio?
Why did you suffer Iachimo,
Some griefs are med'cinable, that is one of them,
And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow,
By your pardon, sir, I was then a young traveller,
Cried 'O!' and mounted, found no opposition
direct them the way I am going, but such as wink and
His favour is familiar to me. Boy,
Last night 'twas on mine arm, I kiss'd it:
To unbar these locks. My conscience, thou art fetter'd
When she had fitted you with her craft, to work
Thou hast finish'd joy and moan:
Above ten thousand meaner moveables
They were again together: you have done
The life o' the need: having found the backdoor open
Of my lord's health, of his content, yet not
Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne
Preservers of my throne. Woe is my heart
Exit
Attended by my men: I will make bold
So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown,
And I will kill thee, if thou dost deny
Base and unlustrous as the smoky light
And truly yielded you. You're very welcome.
I could not stir him:
Not after our command. Away with her,
conversant in general services, and more remarkable
companion that you give offence to.
Have never wing'd from view o' the nest, nor know not
But no trace of him.
To you, the liver, heart and brain of Britain,
Be given to your remembrance--the description
heaviness: of this contradiction you shall now be
That ever hath but clipp'd his body, is dearer
O, no, no, no! 'tis true. Here, take this too,
That what's else rare is choked, and in that point
Say, then, to Caesar,
The whole world shall not save him.
Great griefs, I see, medicine the less, for Cloten
But his neat cookery! he cut our roots
Who? thy lord? that is my lord, Leonatus!
Exit
'Tis almost night: you shall have better cheer
Britons must take. For me, my ransom's death,
Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never
Enter PISANIO
Against thy deity.
Exit
I love thee, I have spoke it
'Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords,
Does yet depend.
But not every man patient after the noble temper of
'Tis true:--nay, keep the ring--'tis true: I am sure
As I have such a heart that both mine ears
Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity
Hurt him! his body's a passable carcass, if he be
Lest, being miss'd, I be suspected of
Care no more to clothe and eat,
Consign to thee, and come to dust.
that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my design. Be
To send them to you, only for this night,
Can we set eye on, but in all safe reason
To take them in protection?
And so, I hope, he came by't. Back my ring:
For mine's beyond beyond--say, and speak thick,
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
To him the other two shall minister,
It poison'd me.
My master's enemy.
will do, let her remain, but I'll never give o'er.
To have begg'd or bought what I have took:
It was wise nature's end in the donation,
Your son's my father's friend, he takes his part.
Come hither: ah, you precious pander! Villain,
Their deer to the stand o' the stealer, and 'tis gold
Displace our heads where--thank the gods!--they grow,
At the next word: no more of 'worthy lord!'
But that there is this jewel in the world
Wilt thou serve me? for since patiently and
Though peril to my modesty, not death on't,
By thine own tongue thou art condemn'd, and must
Beginning nor supplyment.
Are strewings fitt'st for graves. Upon their faces.
Full weak to undertake our wars against
Hark, boys.
We were to question further: but I now
All o'erjoy'd,
No danger in what show of death it makes,
did atone my countryman and you, it had been pity
Being all to dolours turn'd?
An enemy to my son. How now, Pisanio!
Exeunt
I shall unfold equal discourtesy
The hope of comfort. But for thee, fellow,
That's due to all the villains past, in being,
That fly me thus? some villain mountaineers?
The day that she was missing he was here:
O, gentlemen, help!
I' the name of fame and honour, which dies i'
Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?
What's your name?
eyes, there shall she see my valour, which will then
it is mended--my quarrel was not altogether slight.
His majesty bids you welcome. Make
Here is a path to't: 'tis some savage hold:
Is outward sorrow, though I think the king
Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
Enter LUCIUS, a Captain and other Officers, and a Soothsayer
So likely to report themselves: the cutter
The drug he gave me, which he said was precious
You were inspired to do those duties which
I must be ripp'd:--to pieces with me!--O,
Increase your services, so seem as if
Among the Italian gentry, and to fight
And not have it, 'twere a paper lost,
Remaining now in Gallia?
Aside
mind good, O, there were desolation of gaolers and
Which are the movers of a languishing death,
If it be sin to say so, I yoke me
And to become the geck and scorn
So graze as you find pasture.
estimations, the one is but frail and the other
Winning will put any man into courage. If I could
What got he by that? You have broke his pate with
Cowards father cowards and base things sire base:
An arm as big as thine? a heart as big?
He'ld fetch us in, yet is't not probable
Groan so in perpetuity than be cured
I am sick still, heart-sick. Pisanio,
Let us leave here, gentlemen.
That is my bed too, lads, an there I'll lie:
Where there's no profit. I prithee, to our rock,
She alone knew this,
And vent it for a mockery? Here is one:
worthy of by your attempt.
And that she should love this fellow and refuse me!
Thou reft'st me of my lands. Euriphile,
Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt
Enter PISANIO
Sent by a consul to me, should not sooner
The king my father shall be made acquainted
The Dian of that time so doth my wife
I have got two worlds by 't. O my gentle brothers,
Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, the
She hath been colted by him.
That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand,
in single oppositions: yet this imperceiverant
To greet your lord with writing, do't to-night:
Breathe not where princes are.
Dare come about him.
any standers-by to curtail his oaths, ha?
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
Would, Polydote, thou hadst not done't! though valour
Thy two sons forth, who, by Belarius stol'n,
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
Here, my good lord.
And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou,
Kneel not to me:
Before I enter'd here, I call'd, and thought
Yours, whom in constancy you think stands so safe.
ACT V
Will force him think I have pick'd the lock and ta'en
How long is this ago?
In a most curious mantle, wrought by the hand
I love and hate her: for she's fair and royal,
Instructs you how to adore the heavens and bows you
As chaste as unsunn'd snow. O, all the devils!
To feed again, though full. You do remember
Enter BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and a British Lord
a woman's fitness comes by fits. Therein I must
Ere clean it o'erthrow nature, makes it valiant,
All corners of the world: kings, queens and states,
And renowned be thy grave!
Nothing to be were better. This was my master,
To temper poisons for her, still pretending
I slew him there.
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.
Exit
Which their own conscience seal'd them--laying by
My friends,
Which is so serious. Let us bury him,
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers
Thou'rt my good youth, my page,
This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse,
Should he make me
To weep 'twixt clock and clock? if sleep
You have me, rich, and I will never fail
That struck the hour!--it was in Rome,--accursed
The same dead thing alive.
Always reserved my holy duty--what
As long a term as yet we have to live,
Good my liege,
Ascends
Of roaring terrors, for the effect of judgment
And tell the fishes he's the queen's son, Cloten:
Be muster'd, bid the captains look to't. Now, sir,
My good master,
'Tis not so dear, yet 'tis a life, you coin'd it:
In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse
Exit
So man and man should be,
Their liberties are now in arms, a precedent
Exit
More sweet than our blest fields: his royal bird
I cannot tremble at it: were it Toad, or
By both your wills.
As it doth me--a nobler sir ne'er lived
Did softly press the rushes, ere he waken'd
Some Roman courtezan.
Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place
service I have done fatherly.
That we the horrider may seem to those
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and two Gaolers
her home again. She hath despised me rejoicingly,
Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone,
I heard no letter from my master since
There is gold for you,
To see this gracious season.
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art,
I have spoke this, to know if your affiance
And cordial to me, have I not found it
many I have beheld. I could not but believe she
Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.
How! me?
A Roman,
Your lady
On greatness' favour dream as I have done,
Are now each one the slaughter-man of twenty:
Exeunt GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS
Wherein I am false I am honest, not true, to be true.
That others do--
If I do line one of their hands? 'Tis gold
Their royal blood enchafed, as the rudest wind,
To thy further fear,
He was a prince.
Uncertain favour!
Gods, put the strength o' the Leonati in me!
Of Cloten's death--we being not known, not muster'd
Are we not brothers?
Under these windows, white and azure laced
Shall give thee opportunity.' O damn'd paper!
Be call'd Posthumus Leonitus, and
By good Euriphile, our mother.
Why, worthy father, what have we to lose,
That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
So fair an outward and such stuff within
Abhorr'd your person.
A dram of worth be drawn.
Why good fellow,
Smile to't before, if winterly, thou need'st
Our courtiers say all's savage but at court:
Made scruple of his praise, and wager'd with him
Enter CORNELIUS and Ladies
More than the locking-up the spirits a time,
[To GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS]  Though you did love
Aside
While sense can keep it on. And, sweetest, fairest,
My peace we will begin. And, Caius Lucius,
For so I thought I was a cave-keeper,
He hath been search'd among the dead and living,
Milford-Haven. She hath my letter for the purpose
That thought her like her seeming, it had
Cannot amend me, society is no comfort
That we meet here so strangely: but her son
[Looking into the cave]
Thou orphans' father art,
If not at court,
Or stomach-qualm'd at land, a dram of this
Thou'rt poison to my blood.
stock, and freshly grow, then shall Posthumus end
More, sir, and worse. She did confess she had
There's more to be consider'd, but we'll even
The boy hath taught us manly duties: let us
Is that we scarce are men and you are gods.
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten,
Come, I'll go see this Italian: what I have lost
Kills me to look on't. Let there be no honour
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Two of the sweet'st companions in the world.
In this place we left them:
To be revenged upon her. For when fools Shall--
Can trip me, if I err, who with wet cheeks
Post I in this design: well may you, sir,
And will continue fast to your affection,
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
Exeunt
I cannot sing: I'll weep, and word it with thee,
Thou hadst, great king, a subject who
Please your highness,
In a true hate, to pray they have their will:
Who worse than a physician
For beauty that made barren the swell'd boast
You made great Juno angry.
Must first induce you to believe: whose strength
Gold strew'd i' the floor. Here's money for my meat:
When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet
To bring him to the haven, left these notes
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment
Of the divorce he'ld make! The heavens hold firm
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send,
And make him with our pikes and partisans
Great men,
Our viands had been poison'd, or at least
Is gone, we know not how nor where.
I do extend him, sir, within himself,
Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds
What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one!
But I beseech your grace, without offence,--
Weeps she still, say'st thou? Dost thou think in time
Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
A most incivil one: the wrongs he did me
His favour with the radiant Cymbeline,
Now, master doctor, have you brought those drugs?
'Tis time must do. Beseech your majesty,
my every action to be guided by others' experiences:
The sweat of industry would dry and die,
The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant
Upon a valiant race thy harsh
Whereto constrain'd by her infirmity,
A headless man! The garments of Posthumus!
And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils
Enter CYMBELINE, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, PISANIO, Lords, Officers, and Attendants
The part I came in: fight I will no more,
Hang there like a fruit, my soul,
One vice, but of a minute old, for one
In such a time nothing becoming you,
Cannot be question'd.
Crush him together rather than unfold
A shop of all the qualities that man
No reason I, since of your lives you set
My humble thanks. I had almost forgot
The swiftest harts have posted you by land,
Something's afore't. Soft, soft! we'll no defence,
Of rich and exquisite form, their values great,
With needless jealosy,
And pen her up.
their father,
Commanded of me those most poisonous compounds,
SCENE II. Imogen's bedchamber in Cymbeline's palace:
Profane fellow
Italian fiend! Ay me, most credulous fool,
You had a motive for't.
which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still.
To the tender of our present.
What's the matter, sir?
your enemy, she is not worth our debate: if she
And she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye
Lucina lent not me her aid,
The villany of our fears.
Better to cease to be. Pray, sir, to the army:
Your highness knows. Their nurse, Euriphile,
shoulders, shall within this hour be off, thy
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Means he not us? I partly know him: 'tis
With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats,
Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain
Shall's have a play of this? Thou scornful page,
'Tis their fresh supplies.
Or, wing'd with fervor of her love, she's flown
From our blest altars. Publish we this peace
Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on the
To draw upon an exile! O brave sir!
And such a welcome as I'd give to him
I still win of you: for my sake wear this,
My queen, my life, my wife! O Imogen,
If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I hurt him?
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool,
That drug-damn'd Italy hath out-craftied him,
And ears so cloy'd importantly as now,
Showing the bracelet
As does a Briton peasant: so I'll fight
I am not vexed more at any thing in the earth: a
From thy great fall. Come, fellow, be thou honest:
Is this most constant wife, who, even now,
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter:
Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.
And burst of speaking, were as his: I am absolute
The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point--
I dare be bound he's true and shall perform
Enter in state, CYMBELINE, QUEEN, CLOTEN,  and Lords at one door, and at another, CAIUS LUCIUS and Attendants
That hath her husband banish'd,--O, that husband!
A look untender? If't be summer news,
Endows a man but he.
Her father. I'll do something--
On either side I come to spend my breath,
Nor tent to bottom that. But speak.
To PISANIO
She wish'd me to make known, but our great court
That angel of the world, doth make distinction
That could stand up his parallel,
If it could so roar to me: I cut off's head,
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Who to my father was a friend, to me
To be his groom: thou wert dignified enough,
Your death has eyes in 's head then, I have not seen
By inches waste you: in which time she purposed,
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!
No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit
adornment of my qualities. With that suit upon my
But had his titles by Tenantius whom
Die the death:
Is full accomplish'd, for the Roman eagle,
What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
Save these in bonds: let them be joyful too,
which may, without contradiction, suffer the report.
Mine action and thine own? our horses' labour?
for all he be a Roman: and there be some of them
Which torments me to conceal. By villany
And though he came our enemy, remember
That long to move.
May make some stronger head, the which he hearing--
The time inviting thee? the perturb'd court,
Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed,
And worms will not come to thee.
Were present when she finish'd.
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
I prithee, call me. Sleep hath seized me wholly
May take off some extremity, which to read
To make perfumes? distil? preserve? yea, so
Plenty and peace breeds cowards: hardness ever
Must wear the print of his remembrance out,
To ope their golden eyes:
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fool'd
Dream often so,
Who's there? my woman Helen?
Which rottenness can lend nature! such boil'd stuff
Thy Caesar knighted me, my youth I spent
On their abatement: that's not my desire:
A sacrilegious thief, to do't: the temple
But what from Rome?
that, commend me to the court where your lady is,
what villany soe'er I bid thee do, to perform it
cats and dogs,
both empty, the brain the heavier for being too
In doing this for's country: athwart the lane,
Sir, step you forth,
Thou makest thy bloody pillow? Or who was he
Half all men's hearts are his.
Deliver with more openness your answers
That I may see again.
I praised her as I rated her: so do I my stone.
sufficient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest
From action and adventure?
I see into thy end, and am almost
That it is place which lessens and sets off,
With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
I got this ring: 'twas Leonatus' jewel,
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
With prayers for the provider.
Of him that best could speak, for feature, laming
For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied,
We'll hunt no more to-day, nor seek for danger
And am so near the lack of charity--
Where they should be relieved. Two beggars told me
For being preferred so well.
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman: she's wedded,
I thank thee for myself.
Why fled you from the court? and whither? These,
That all the plagues of hell should at one time
most coldest that ever turned up ace.
I do believe,
Thou art my brother, so we'll hold thee ever.
Fold down the leaf where I have left: to bed:
sir, you know not which way you shall go.
It would make any man cold to lose.
The stone's too hard to come by.
Nay, stay a little:
We have done our obsequies: come, lay him down.
For they shall taste our comfort.
The marble pavement closes, he is enter'd
And that the legions now in Gallia are
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Experience, O, thou disprovest report!
No more, you petty spirits of region low,
Hath with his forged letters,--damn'd Pisanio--
Beyond self-explication: put thyself
Re-enter IMOGEN
So long attended thee. If thou wert honourable,
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
That, otherwise than noble nature did,
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
I am sorry for 't, not seeming
I know not how much more, should be demanded,
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king
Enter POLONIUS, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN
Nor I, my lord, in faith.
I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your
I do beseech you.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none,
No, my lord, rather with choler.
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl,
To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
To LAERTES
My necessaries are embark'd: farewell:
How came he mad?
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
You should not have believed me, for virtue cannot
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will.
No, it is struck.
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
it: I loved you not.
What's near it with it: it is a massy wheel,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Pray you, mark.
My fate cries out,
Scattering flowers
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,
But age, with his stealing steps,
Had witchcraft in't, he grew unto his seat,
those that do in: now thou dost ill to say the
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife,
What is the matter?
My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go
I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat,
In that and all things will we show our duty.
But yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother
earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most
me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.
Exeunt all but HAMLET
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Exit OSRIC
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
When he the ambitious Norway combated,
sigh gratis, the humourous man shall end his part
Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
Will not peruse the foils, so that, with ease,
We must, with all our majesty and skill,
One.
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night sweet prince:
Hoist with his own petard: and 't shall go hard
Ay, amen!
The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
Exeunt Attendants
You are naught, you are naught: I'll mark the play.
Comes armed through our watch, so like the king
We have sworn, my lord, already.
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave
the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget
Well be with you, gentlemen!
What, my lord?
the duke's name, his wife, Baptista: you shall see
imagination to give them shape, or time to act them
Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up,
This is mere madness:
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
That are so fortified against our story
And here give up ourselves, in the full bent
Here's to thy health.
He shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
God's bodykins, man, much better: use every man
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
Mark the encounter: if he love her not
Exit
in the city? are they so followed?
He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman,
I had not quoted him: I fear'd he did but trifle,
O, methought, there was nothing meet.
E'en so.
and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb,
Exit POLONIUS
mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
Hamlet the Dane.
With tristful visage, as against the doom,
But let this same be presently perform'd,
March afar off, and shot within
Sir, in this audience,
With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
In what particular thought to work I know not,
None but his enemies.
but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my
Gentlemen,--
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Enter HAMLET, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and others
know him. He hath much land, and fertile: let a
That I have positively said 'Tis so,'
Now get you to my lady's chamber, and tell her, let
Re-enter Ghost
Dies
Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish: I eat
whether you were sent for, or no?
Good.
Your wisdom should show itself more richer to
That so his sickness, age and impotence
That grows to seed, things rank and gross in nature
I do beseech you, give him leave to go.
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Nor I, my lord.
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
mark it. You say right, sir: o' Monday morning,
and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother. Come, for England!
I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this water-fly?
I will not speak with her.
And with a sudden vigour doth posset
As from the body of contraction plucks
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
I do not well understand that. Will you play upon
I would set down and insert in't, could you not?
Of man and country.
It shall to the barber's, with your beard. Prithee,
God bless you, sir.
Our crown, our life, and all that we can ours,
Do the boys carry it away?
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
Enter POLONIUS
Witness this army of such mass and charge
Reads
Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't:
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
You must not take for fire. From this time
That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once:
And my imaginations are as foul
There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take
uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
So he does indeed.
Put your dread pleasures more into command
'Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!'
And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
On such regards of safety and allowance
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
Ay, my lord.
And with a larger tether may he walk
Christian burial.
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
A Norman.
Of blue Olympus.
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
could see the puppets dallying.
say on: he's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he
Dared to the combat, in which our valiant Hamlet--
Rough-hew them how we will,--
My lord, I cannot.
Long live the king!
Against some part of Poland.
have been in continual practise: I shall win at the
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
No more!
If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
When Roscius was an actor in Rome,--
But to my mind, though I am native here
You must not put another scandal on him,
They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now!
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
Let me be no assistant for a state,
For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
As they fell out by time, by means and place,
signify this to his doctor, for, for me to put him
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
That is Laertes,
Believe me, I cannot.
Good night, mother.
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Falls and dies
And set a double varnish on the fame
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord,
That inward breaks, and shows no cause without
As you are friends, scholars and soldiers,
[Behind]  O, I am slain!
Pours the poison into the sleeper's ears
How chances it they travel? their residence, both
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
Is now most still, most secret and most grave,
Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
have many pocky corses now-a-days, that will scarce
Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
I'll visit you.
Your sudden coming o'er, to play with him.
Will you know them then?
Importing the surrender of those lands
Enter POLONIUS and REYNALDO
What shall I do?
modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it: as
Why should we in our peevish opposition
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried,
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the
And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy: he hath
the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to
And for your rapier most especially,
These words, like daggers, enter in mine ears,
SCENE IV. The platform.
SCENE I. A room in POLONIUS' house.
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out
Enter HAMLET and GUILDENSTERN
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply:
The Mouse-trap. Marry, how? Tropically. This play
And could of men distinguish, her election
Exit
Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
With fiery quickness: therefore prepare thyself,
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
Horatio, these three years I have taken a note of
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
O, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false
Not a whit, we defy augury: there's a special
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
To draw apart the body he hath kill'd:
No medicine in the world can do thee good,
own defence?
You must sing a-down a-down,
At his heels a stone.
We'll wait upon you.
entertainment than yours. You are welcome: but my
How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,
Buz, buz!
his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and
As peace should stiff her wheaten garland wear
There falling out at tennis:' or perchance,
As are companions noted and most known
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Let them come in.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
ask you what it means, say you this:
Thanks, dear my lord.
Enter KING CLAUDIUS, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN
Exit POLONIUS
Have you forgot me?
The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
We o'er-raught on the way: of these we told him,
Why does the drum come hither?
To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom
Let him demand his fill.
The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow?
lady and mistress! By'r lady, your ladyship is
nature's journeymen had made men and not made them
thee. Farewell.
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
For what we know must be and is as common
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves,
And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
And thou must cure me: till I know 'tis done,
Unbated and envenom'd: the foul practise
I must be cruel, only to be kind:
And smelt so? pah!
late innovation.
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
worm is your only emperor for diet: we fat all
Farewell.
I loved you ever: but it is no matter,
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
keep counsel, they'll tell all.
With forms to his conceit? and all for nothing!
leaves, what is't to leave betimes?
To you yourself, to us, to every one.
to the court? for, by my fay, I cannot reason.
And nothing is at a like goodness still,
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
The soldiers' music and the rites of war
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
There with fantastic garlands did she come
the matter. These good fellows will bring thee
Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you
Let her come in.
Out of his lunacies.
Seems, madam! nay it is, I know not 'seems.'
Yea, this solidity and compound mass,
charge you withal, be even and direct with me,
Was he a gentleman?
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
should impart a thing to you from his majesty.
Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,--
Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?
[Reads]  'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked
If that his majesty would aught with us,
And I believe, it is a fetch of wit:
For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
Woo't drink up eisel? eat a crocodile?
Consent to swear.
No!
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Makes a pass through the arras
[Advancing]     What is he whose grief
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there
gaffs his kibe. How long hast thou been a
My lord, I have.
King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!
To be your Valentine.
If she should break it now!
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends,
That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
Unto our climatures and countrymen.--
Enter HAMLET, HORATIO, and MARCELLUS
I understand you not, my lord.
To reason most absurd: whose common theme
Addicted so and so:' and there put on him
Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
king best service in the end: he keeps them, like
There's no offence, my lord.
go to bed.
I did very well note him.
Did you not speak to it?
Give you good night.
I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
To hear him so inclined.
Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
a compelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
And melt in her own fire: proclaim no shame
Why, man, they did make love to this employment,
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers,
These tedious old fools!
Does it not, think'st thee, stand me now upon--
the time and outward habit of encounter, a kind of
'Tis in my memory lock'd,
Let this be so,
And he to England shall along with you:
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
players that I have seen play, and heard others
For we will fetters put upon this fear,
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
That even our loves should with our fortunes change,
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha't.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
I doubt it is no other but the main,
wherefore I know not--lost all my mirth, forgone all
Re-enter HORATIO, with OPHELIA
Arm'd, my lord.
How now, sweet queen!
Another hit, what say you?
gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment,
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
Hear you, sir,
Nay, good my lord, for mine ease, in good faith.
Enter HORATIO
That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Buys out the law: but 'tis not so above,
In the secret parts of fortune? O, most true, she
The body is with the king, but the king is not with
They have proclaim'd their malefactions,
The lives of many. The cease of majesty
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
So many journeys may the sun and moon
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend
Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures
To hear and see the matter.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Takes the skull
For the demand of our neglected tribute
another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and
Pray you, let's have no words of this, but when they
Love! his affections do not that way tend,
abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rims at
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great
Or such ambiguous giving out, to note
spirit, hath sent me to you.
Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
You, as your business and desire shall point you,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Not I, my lord.
The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we
an ape, in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed, to
her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
With an attent ear, till I may deliver,
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
But in the gross and scope of my opinion,
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
now o'er-reaches, one that would circumvent God,
Fare you well, my lord.
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead:
If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
To cast thee up again. What may this mean,
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be wi' ye.
And either [         ] the devil, or throw him out
To the ambassadors of England gives
Why I will fight with him upon this theme
Before my God, I might not this believe
So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.
How to forget that learning, but, sir, now
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Marry, this is miching mallecho, it means mischief.
So by his father lost: and this, I take it,
[Sings]
Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
liberal-conceited carriages, that's the French bet
She should in ground unsanctified have lodged
You might have rhymed.
It sends some precious instance of itself
I saw him yesterday, or t' other day,
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
My honoured lord!
Saw? who?
Ay, my lord,
Writing
her favours?
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Enter POLONIUS
fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
I commend my duty to your lordship.
The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since,
Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech,
Leaps into the grave
With sore distraction. What I have done,
digested in the scenes, set down with as much
From fashion of himself. What think you on't?
SCENE V. Another part of the platform.
That we find out the cause of this effect,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
My lord, we will not.
But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
I have sent to seek him, and to find the body.
Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
I'll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!
Why thou art thus incensed. Let him go, Gertrude.
Is't possible?
Make you to ravel all this matter out,
Dies not alone, but, like a gulf, doth draw
Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN
Capitol, Brutus killed me.
As kill a king!
What man dost thou dig it for?
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
For some must watch, while some must sleep:
Words, words, words.
Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes,
Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
To those of mine!
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
truepenny?
must show fairly outward, should more appear like
May do, to express his love and friending to you,
The insolence of office and the spurns
For food and diet, to some enterprise
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
We should do when we would, for this 'would' changes
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
this box, and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?
His beard was as white as snow,
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
[Sings]
Nay, then, I'll set those to you that can speak.
There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds
But let it be. Horatio, I am dead,
Say,
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
Let him bless thee too.
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?
Why,
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
A rhapsody of words: heaven's face doth glow:
Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand
Marry, I'll teach you: think yourself a baby,
No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
It waves you to a more removed ground:
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
Then, venom, to thy work.
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
She is importunate, indeed distract:
With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,
If your mind dislike any thing, obey it: I will
What, the fair Ophelia!
With the brave beast: so far he topp'd my thought,
Couch we awhile, and mark.
wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
Why, what a king is this!
laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve, the
Go softly on.
Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers,
You know the wager?
Your wisdom best shall think.
three and twenty years.
yours: for my part, I do not lie in't, and yet it is mine.
He will stay till ye come.
As oft as any passion under heaven
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
O my son, what theme?
He does well to commend it himself, there are no
That can I,
Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden
But to recover of us, by strong hand
To show my duty in your coronation,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
Till the last trumpet: for charitable prayers,
a year: but, by'r lady, he must build churches,
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
Not shriving-time allow'd.
those that are married already, all but one, shall
[Aside]  And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience.
Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase, 'beautified' is
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
he will keep out water a great while, and your water
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
Exit
The imminent death of twenty thousand men,
With all my love I do commend me to you:
Which is the mightier: in his lawless fit,
Good my lord,
I'll board him presently.
Pleasant and helpful to him!
With true-love showers.
Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
pronounced:
Of these delated articles allow.
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents,
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
I am very glad to see you. Good even, sir.
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
For God's love, let me hear.
Of him that brought them.
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The bold winds speechless and the orb below
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
O, a pit of clay for to be made
Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
To't.
[Aside to GUILDENSTERN]  What say you?
variable service, two dishes, but to one table:
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
Thy knotted and combined locks to part
in our more rawer breath?
Enter POLONIUS
Pointing to POLONIUS
is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's
Ere I could make a prologue to my brains,
Alas, alas!
too, though, in the mean time, some necessary
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
For, by the image of my cause, I see
In second husband let me be accurst!
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
No, good mother, here's metal more attractive.
Be buried quick with her, and so will I:
Reads
It would have much amazed you.
thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are
You are welcome.
The triumph of his pledge.
To quit him with this arm? and is't not to be damn'd,
And so have I a noble father lost,
Ha!
This to your majesty, this to the queen.
I've seen myself, and served against, the French,
Since nature cannot choose his origin--
In the same figure, like the king that's dead.
In filial obligation for some term
For women's fear and love holds quantity,
For love of God, forbear him.
[Aside]  Wormwood, wormwood.
That if again this apparition come,
And let all sleep? while, to my shame, I see
But we both obey,
We will, my lord.
Upon whose property and most dear life
O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!
Leave wringing of your hands: peace! sit you down,
[Aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If you
You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
Of Laertes?
me! You would play upon me, you would seem to know
my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an
But in our circumstance and course of thought,
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.
Unless things mortal move them not at all,
Of thinking too precisely on the event,
Remember it, my lord?
From the first corse till he that died to-day,
Exeunt
[Sings]
Where every god did seem to set his seal,
And ever three parts coward, I do not know
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
Ay, good my lord.
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
Stabs KING CLAUDIUS
As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'
We should profane the service of the dead
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
See, it stalks away!
Alack,
For none, neither.
Nay, good my lord,--
Ay, fashion you may call it, go to, go to.
This mad young man: but so much was our love,
No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt,
O, but she'll keep her word.
are as mad as he.
What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
daughter: yet he knew me not at first, he said I
She's so conjunctive to my life and soul,
Have at you now!
Why seems it so particular with thee?
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
To OPHELIA
Exeunt
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
Let me not think on't--Frailty, thy name is woman!--
And makes each petty artery in this body
Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed,
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
I find thee apt,
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
Be you and I behind an arras then,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
Save me, and hover o'er me with your wings,
Enter KING CLAUDIUS and LAERTES
With all the strength and armour of the mind,
Take this from this, if this be otherwise:
The harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
Let the birds fly, and, like the famous ape,
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him:
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
For out o' doors he went without their helps,
And lay your hands again upon my sword:
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
And there assume some other horrible form,
there, or, if he do not, it's no great matter there.
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
That from her working all his visage wann'd,
Where is my father?
How now, Ophelia! what's the matter?
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use, 'tis for the head.
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
An thou hadst not come to my bed.
O heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt,
praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely,
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently,
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
Believe what?
If with too credent ear you list his songs,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to
The violence of either grief or joy
Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!
Wilt please you go, my lord?
tongues else for's turn.
Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
me one thing.
Why he more than another?
We will bestow ourselves.
Most thoroughly for my father.
and then, you know,
Make mad the guilty and appal the free,
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
That's not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly
my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune,
And in his grave rain'd many a tear:--
much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I
you: we coted them on the way, and hither are they
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd,
It might, my lord.
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' the throat,
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,
My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
The rather, if you could devise it so
My lord, I did intend it.
When down her weedy trophies and herself
'Anon he finds him
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant, it
What speech, my lord?
Now wears his crown.
And thus awhile the fit will work on him,
And the king's rouse the heavens all bruit again,
QUEEN GERTRUDE falls
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
When we would bring him on to some confession
The unseen good old man.
substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
Lying down at OPHELIA's feet
A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
What company, at what expense, and finding
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Yet have I something in me dangerous,
My mother: father and mother is man and wife, man
Nay, but hear you, goodman delver,--
O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
of your quality, come, a passionate speech.
gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers:
Whose violent property fordoes itself
Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew'd,
Never make known what you have seen to-night.
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay!
I see a cherub that sees them. But, come, for
Not from his mouth,
Follow her close, give her good watch,
Or by some habit that too much o'er-leavens
Ay, marry, is't:
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
Good Laertes,
they have letters for him. Ere we were two days old
Welcome, my good friends!
The very same.
That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
They retire without the door
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
Between the pass and fell incensed points
where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their
Reads
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
Enter POLONIUS
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I
[Pointing to his head and shoulder]
till he find it stopping a bung-hole?
[Aside]  Still on my daughter.
In noise so rude against me?
[Aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is method
That's two of his weapons: but, well.
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Nay, that follows not.
Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?
bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am
play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.
Even on the pith of Life. Where is he gone?
see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding,
call them--that many wearing rapiers are afraid of
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Ay, that they do, my lord, Hercules and his load too.
As gaming, my lord.
Nay, I know not:
Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS
Retires and kneels
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
king hold his purpose, I will win for him an I can,
A noise within
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
Nor thine on me.
and of very liberal conceit.
But this eternal blazon must not be
And hath shipped me intil the land,
For who, that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Striking too short at Greeks, his antique sword,
Good my lord, tell it.
Thou know'st already.
what monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
Bid the players make haste.
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
it is a prison.
So horridly to shake our disposition
Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
'This must be so.' We pray you, throw to earth
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at
The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
No more, sweet Hamlet!
How does the queen?
Nay, but to live
All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
Ho, Guildenstern! bring in my lord.
O, confound the rest!
How does your honour for this many a day?
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
And with a look so piteous in purport
Hamlet return'd shall know you are come home:
I will bestow him, and will answer well
The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,
O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
She swounds to see them bleed.
The which he loved passing well.'
To assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes:
From Hamlet! who brought them?
Mother, good night. Indeed this counsellor
Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion
Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN
With which she follow'd my poor father's body,
As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
I have heard of your paintings too, well enough, God
Follow him, friends: we'll hear a play to-morrow.
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil!
Been thus encounter'd. A figure like your father,
White his shroud as the mountain snow,--
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come,
your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your
gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman.
it. Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-
And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.
That was and is the question of these wars.
In thee there is not half an hour of life,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
It is offended.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
say an old man is twice a child.
His beard was grizzled--no?
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
friend! thy face is valenced since I saw thee last:
For your desire to know what is between us,
Take them in.
Madam, I wish it may.
beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?
My will, not all the world:
With drink, sir?
excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks, but I
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
E'en so, my lord.
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,--
I do not know from what part of the world
Without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure.
I do not think so: since he went into France, I
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
In youth, when I did love, did love,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab
they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.
That would not let me sleep: methought I lay
Yours, yours.
sings at grave-making?
What did you enact?
How in my words soever she be shent,
'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star,
The chariest maid is prodigal enough,
Why?
to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far
Go to your rest, at night we'll feast together:
The instant burst of clamour that she made,
Alas, he's mad!
Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN
What imports the nomination of this gentleman?
Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he
Ah, ha! Come, some music! come, the recorders!
Well, God-a-mercy.
A sister driven into desperate terms,
The king shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love:
Is the main motive of our preparations,
That youth and observation copied there,
Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
They play
pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come:
I bought an unction of a mountebank,
liberty, these are the only men.
Been struck so to the soul that presently
to't like French falconers, fly at any thing we see:
It shall be so:
So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.
And, with his head over his shoulder turn'd,
That I am guiltless of your father's death,
SCENE IV. The Queen's closet.
I know the good king and queen have sent for you.
To give it due content.
And fix'd his eyes upon you?
in that. I will speak to this fellow. Whose
that she sends you to prison hither?
Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine,
SCENE II. A room of state in the castle.
Much heat and him. I'll sconce me even here.
When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,
I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us,
What is, my lord?
Ay, my lord.
Denmark's a prison.
O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But
O Gertrude, come away!
His access to me.
To England send him, or confine him where
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
world! the paragon of animals! And yet, to me,
Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
It waves me still.
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
And hurt my brother.
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
No, no, he is dead:
The corse they follow did with desperate hand
My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
There's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves:
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
word to the action, with this special o'erstep not
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
how infinite in faculty! in form and moving how
Would have reverted to my bow again,
I will tell you why, so shall my anticipation
Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS
Most free in his reply.
I think it lacks of twelve.
Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
Not that I think you did not love your father,
My virtue or my plague, be it either which--
Ay, my lord.
Observe his inclination in yourself.
I can no more: the king, the king's to blame.
[Aside]  A little more than kin, and less than kind.
Then came each actor on his ass,--
My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!
Do not forget: this visitation
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
Should have a back or second, that might hold,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
Speak, man.
And recks not his own rede.
He falls to such perusal of my face
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
About the world have times twelve thirties been,
With arms encumber'd thus, or this headshake,
He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it.
And drive his purpose on to these delights.
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
Ay, madam, it is common.
As fits a king's remembrance.
Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
SCENE II. A hall in the castle.
He digs and sings
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
earth we make loam, and why of that loam, whereto he
Had made his course to illume that part of heaven
'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late
To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
Exit
grave-maker?
His silence will sit drooping.
That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
Which now goes too free-footed.
maggots: your fat king and your lean beggar is but
Be wary then, best safety lies in fear:
Is strict in his arrest--O, I could tell you--
So frown'd he once, when, in an angry parle,
Make you a wholesome answer, my wit's diseased: but,
Alas, poor ghost!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
What do you read, my lord?
I was the more deceived.
Propose the oath, my lord.
now, to mock your own grinning? quite chap-fallen?
Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.
deal justly with me: come, come, nay, speak.
My crown, mine own ambition and my queen.
What do you call the play?
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Lay her i' the earth:
Upon my sword.
'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.'
And can you, by no drift of circumstance,
is a strumpet. What's the news?
The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of
No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
He never will come again.
More than in words?
Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?
Marry, sir, here's my drift,
God be wi' you, sir.
be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To muddy death.
Anon, as patient as the female dove,
Haply the seas and countries different
The portraiture of his: I'll court his favours.
I mean, sir, for his weapon, but in the imputation
Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof,
How pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness
You will do't, sir, really.
Leaps into the grave
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
So you must take your husbands. Begin, murderer,
Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain
bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used, for
To let you know of it.
you make it speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am
Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon.
No reckoning made, but sent to my account
What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
To try conclusions, in the basket creep,
But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two:
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you
How long is that since?
purpose, confess thyself--
LAERTES wounds HAMLET, then in scuffling, they change rapiers, and HAMLET wounds LAERTES
Is it the king?
Seek for thy noble father in the dust:
Exeunt all but HAMLET and HORATIO
Our purpose may hold there.
Thy natural magic and dire property,
So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
To be commanded.
As we have warrantise: her death was doubtful,
What have I done, that thou darest wag thy tongue
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
As if increase of appetite had grown
The hart ungalled play,
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own:
I had my father's signet in my purse,
Enter FORTINBRAS, the English Ambassadors, and others
Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the
Against the which, a moiety competent
That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation
The actors are come hither, my lord.
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
My head should be struck off.
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws,
Hath seal'd thee for herself, for thou hast been
Nor did you nothing hear?
Sure, he that made us with such large discourse,
So you shall,
readiness is all: since no man has aught of what he
Here, sweet lord, at your service.
Exit POLONIUS
censure of the which one must in your allowance
quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.
honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
That might your nature, honour and exception
I shall not look upon his like again.
The doors are broke.
That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should
Come, one for me.
O my prophetic soul! My uncle!
I never gave you aught.
Hautboys play. The dumb-show enters
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the
But if the gods themselves did see her then
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
FRANCISCO at his post. Enter to him BERNARDO
The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege:
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
She turns to favour and to prettiness.
What should we say, my lord?
What is it ye would see?
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
That, for a fantasy and trick of fame,
my beck than I have thoughts to put them in,
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
What part is that, my lord?
And sets a blister there, makes marriage-vows
Question it, Horatio.
Come, I will make you way for these your letters,
To any pastime?
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works:
The point!--envenom'd too!
Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that
Never departed more.
To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
caviare to the general: but it was--as I received
Thou art a scholar, speak to it, Horatio.
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
'To the celestial and my soul's idol, the most
I do believe you think what now you speak,
I say, away! Go on, I'll follow thee.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend.
majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a
'Tis gone!
O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
ACT II
It lifted up its head and did address
Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,
They shall go far with little.
Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon,
poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
Exit Lord
Go to thy death-bed:
Even with the very comment of thy soul
So much from the understanding of himself,
Have after. To what issue will this come?
That he which hath your noble father slain
'The mobled queen?'
How is't, my noble lord?
Ay, by heaven, my lord.
it, and others, whose judgments in such matters
'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile,
Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!
May fit us to our shape: if this should fail,
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
Enter HORATIO, MARCELLUS, and BERNARDO
What's that, my lord?
Exeunt
Dies
Give us the foils. Come on.
It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:
stands the man, good, if the man go to this water,
My lord, from head to foot.
And carriage of the article design'd,
And dupp'd the chamber-door,
And hath abatements and delays as many
It will be laid to us, whose providence
It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
Look to the queen there, ho!
I am satisfied in nature,
What is between you? give me up the truth.
Where we shall find him most conveniently.
Excellent well, you are a fishmonger.
And like a neutral to his will and matter,
'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and
Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
In heaven, send hither to see: if your messenger
you are asked this question next, say 'a
your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't, it hath
me to the top of my bent. I will come by and by.
Mad call I it, for, to define true madness,
It must be shortly known to him from England
Sport and repose lock from me day and night!
it is not so:--it begins with Pyrrhus:--
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent:
nunnery, go: farewell. Or, if thou wilt needs
And sith so neighbour'd to his youth and havior,
The cat will mew and dog will have his day.
To offer it the show of violence,
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
Mother, you have my father much offended.
but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.
Alack, what noise is this?
Do you see nothing there?
Alas, look here, my lord.
There is no shuffling, there the action lies
And so am I revenged. That would be scann'd:
O good Horatio, what a wounded name,
I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze,
A Norman was't?
His means of death, his obscure funeral--
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night:
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
marry, marry a fool, for wise men know well enough
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
The light and careless livery that it wears
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Treachery! Seek it out.
The lists and full proportions, are all made
comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
[Sings]
But, my good lord,--
So excellent a king, that was, to this,
Not a jot more, my lord.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
'Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine:
Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy.
Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Retiring with HORATIO
mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
How strangely?
'Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge
God bless you, sir!
'Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with
Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares!
Lights, lights, lights!
If there be any good thing to be done,
plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of
'Tis too much proved--that with devotion's visage
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
'The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,'--
The potent poison quite o'er-crows my spirit:
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
Nay, but swear't.
Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is nothing
Or like a creature native and indued
In what, my dear lord?
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
Let me see.
I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet, these words
Some little time: so by your companies
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages,
What ho! Horatio!
Sit down awhile,
Exeunt FORTINBRAS and Soldiers
now, if it be not now, yet it will come: the
wilfully seeks her own salvation?
To speak of horrors,--he comes before me.
But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my
SCENE I. A room in the castle.
Like quills upon the fretful porpentine:
a carpenter?'
Pays homage to us--thou mayst not coldly set
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less
Pursued my life.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
He is justly served,
grave-maker: 'the houses that he makes last till
our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
To both your honours.
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
Ay, sir, that soaks up the king's countenance, his
Dead.
You are merry, my lord.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit!
Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come,
Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient
[Aside]          O, 'tis too true!
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
To make it truster of your own report
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,
is mad, and sent into England.
How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
Exit HORATIO
His purse is empty already, all's golden words are spent.
And then, they say, no spirit dares stir abroad,
In the corrupted currents of this world
SCENE I. A room in the castle.
Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN
love, remember: and there is pansies. that's for thoughts.
shall be dry again.
But even his mother shall uncharge the practise
altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like
That's very true, my lord.
Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
And a most instant tetter bark'd about,
No.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
Exeunt severally, HAMLET dragging in POLONIUS
Her mood will needs be pitied.
Let in the maid, that out a maid
sir.
what we may be. God be at your table!
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames
It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain,
or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
This night to play before him.
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
Will be some danger: which for to prevent,
So levied as before, against the Polack:
My good lord--
Ay, but sir, 'While the grass grows,'--the proverb
Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and Attendants
And liegemen to the Dane.
I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
Enter OSRIC
The best actors in the world, either for tragedy,
'Tis well: I'll have thee speak out the rest soon.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
thousand tenants.
Is thought-sick at the act.
I have in quick determination
Within the centre.
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss:
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the
To tell my story.
The king, sir, hath laid, that in a dozen passes
Give it an understanding, but no tongue:
Where is Polonius?
i' the cold ground. My brother shall know of it:
But you'll be secret?
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune:
apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
To their lord's murder: roasted in wrath and fire,
For such a guest is meet.
What, frighted with false fire!
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
And I am sick at heart.
By his cockle hat and staff,
How now! what hath befall'n?
So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for
Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
Of nothing: bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
Out of his subject: and we here dispatch
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light!
Are you fair?
Running it thus--you'll tender me a fool.
savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
POLONIUS hides behind the arras
Bernardo?
O, farewell, honest soldier:
Look, with what courteous action
Exit
Methought it was very sweet,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
As day does to your eye.
That hath in it no profit but the name.
never acted, or, if it was, not above once, for the
And much offence too. Touching this vision here,
I do not think't.
[Within]  Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!
Exit Messenger
And loose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
Enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN
Nothing at all, yet all that is I see.
Could not, with all their quantity of love,
And we did think it writ down in our duty
I mean, my head upon your lap?
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
But this most foul, strange and unnatural.
O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd:
did, I am to do a good turn for them. Let the king
Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
that, neither having the accent of Christians nor
lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
Or for some frontier?
Truly deliver.
He made confession of you,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
Have you so slander any moment leisure,
longer than they can sing? will they not say
I will, my lord, I pray you, pardon me.
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' the working, Mark you,
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:
As made the things more rich: their perfume lost,
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
tyrannically clapped for't: these are now the
Sir, I lack advancement.
My lord, I did,
Thou livest, report me and my cause aright
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
It is not very strange, for mine uncle is king of
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris,
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
king, and cat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
And then, sir, does he this--he does--what was I
But he's an arrant knave.
This man shall set me packing:
This grave shall have a living monument:
Fordo its own life: 'twas of some estate.
How long will a man lie i' the earth ere he rot?
Arm'd, say you?
I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with
me: no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling
straight: the crowner hath sat on her, and finds it
chiefly loved: 'twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
What a treasure had he, my lord?
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
If you desire to know the certainty
Exeunt
find him not there, seek him i' the other place
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
Ay, sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
It is 'Adieu, adieu! remember me.'
I'll be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance
Fall'n on the inventors' reads: all this can I
great folk should have countenance in this world to
Directly seasons him his enemy.
See thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
How comes it? do they grow rusty?
In honourable fashion.
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
steward, that stole his master's daughter.
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
Speak of it: stay, and speak! Stop it, Marcellus.
As to peace-parted souls.
Your grace hath laid the odds o' the weaker side.
Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow
Thy state is the more gracious, for 'tis a vice to
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
Exceedingly, my lord, it is very sultry,--as
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Did you assay him?
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
against the Danish. Why is this 'imponed,' as you call it?
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?
It would be spoke to.
I should have fatted all the region kites
Is't not possible to understand in another tongue?
Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
To youth and liberty.
It is backed like a weasel.
And the queen too, and that presently.
But I will delve one yard below their mines,
You will lose this wager, my lord.
I pray you.
And, in this brainish apprehension, kills
It well appears: but tell me
Mine, sir.
Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
Break we our watch up, and by my advice,
The lady protests too much, methinks.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
And reason panders will.
When in your motion you are hot and dry--
And waits upon the judgment: and what judgment
And wager on your heads: he, being remiss,
I do not set my life in a pin's fee,
Affront Ophelia:
Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
progress through the guts of a beggar.
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
He took me by the wrist and held me hard,
And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
Let's further think of this,
this machine is to him, HAMLET.'
We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and some Attendants
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
Exeunt
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword,
cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him
There's letters seal'd: and my two schoolfellows,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
As if I had never been such.
I pray you, pass with your best violence,
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
Re-enter Players with recorders
For husband shalt thou--
So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
man, I am most dreadfully attended. But, in the
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
To show yourself your father's son in deed
E'en that.
Hath turn'd itself on me lo, here I lie,
semblable is his mirror, and who else would trace
As the indifferent children of the earth.
Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
Given private time to you, and you yourself
The head and source of all your son's distemper.
Swear by my sword.
not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander,
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such
No more, and by a sleep to say we end
The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.
You know, sometimes he walks four hours together
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
It was, as I have seen it in his life,
Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
And let him ply his music.
No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest, no offence
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet:
Without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts:
And for the day confined to fast in fires,
if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.
Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
spacious in the possession of dirt.
sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command,
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
Hic et ubique? then we'll shift our ground.
'Swounds, I should take it: for it cannot be
Not when I saw't.
The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together
three hits: he hath laid on twelve for nine, and it
God ha' mercy on his soul!
And fall a-cursing, like a very drab,
The extravagant and erring spirit hies
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
admiration? Impart.
If it be so, Laertes--
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
And break your own neck down.
cried in the top of mine--an excellent play, well
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
That it is proof and bulwark against sense.
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman,'
'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
Friends to this ground.
I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
Enter Prologue
And bear it to the chapel.
He waxes desperate with imagination.
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
Give me one poor request.
Together with that fair and warlike form
Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, HAMLET,  POLONIUS, LAERTES, VOLTIMAND, CORNELIUS, Lords, and Attendants
What call you the carriages?
You lie out on't, sir, and therefore it is not
out of his swaddling-clouts.
Good sir, whose powers are these?
about my heart: but it is no matter.
Enter Priest,  and c. in procession, the Corpse of  OPHELIA, LAERTES and Mourners following, KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, their trains,  and c
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
Sailors, sir: they say they have letters for you.
One that was a woman, sir, but, rest her soul, she's dead.
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
complexion.
And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd
And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm,
March within
was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet
And end his being: that done, he lets me go:
My lord, I'll hit him now.
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
He was the first that ever bore arms.
On fortune's cap we are not the very button.
I would know that.
Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than
Away, I do beseech you, both away:
Why, how now, Hamlet!
He should the bearers put to sudden death,
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself--
what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not
I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.
'tis not to come, if it be not to come, it will be
Plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face?
If it be,
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
has given you one face, and you make yourselves
O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too
come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion
A very riband in the cap of youth,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
Of those effects for which I did the murder,
Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a
By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed.
question of the play be then to be considered:
I knew you must be edified by the margent ere you had done.
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds:
'Tis e'en so: the hand of little employment hath
I would not hear your enemy say so,
To lay our service freely at your feet,
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed,
beautified Ophelia,'--
For 'tis the sport to have the engineer
And vanish'd from our sight.
with us to the king.
An you call him a-down-a.
Does not divide the Sunday from the week,
He likewise gives a frock or livery,
Why, e'en so: and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and
nick-name God's creatures, and make your wantonness
Or--not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Who is to be buried in't?
Enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
Help, help, ho!
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
Honour'd, beloved, and haply one as kind
At supper! where?
Such as it is, and for mine own poor part,
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
There's tricks i' the world, and hems, and beats her heart,
What is't, my lord? we will.
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
To some Attendants
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.
There is a play to-night before the king,
'Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or
Would make them capable. Do not look upon me,
Enter QUEEN GERTRUDE
Nothing.
As to expend your time with us awhile,
This is too heavy, let me see another.
such-a-one's horse, when he meant to beg it, might it not?
In faith,
How purposed, sir, I pray you?
Come hither, gentlemen,
I'm sorry they offend you, heartily,
To take him in the purging of his soul,
To be, or not to be: that is the question:
The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
Conceit upon her father.
But do not go with it.
And do such bitter business as the day
Why, he had none.
Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
Which was declining on the milky head
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Ay, or any show that you'll show him: be not you
Where's your father?
Well said, old mole! canst work i' the earth so fast?
What woman, then?
You shall not go, my lord.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
'Faith, her privates we.
Makes us traduced and tax'd of other nations:
A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a' poured a
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
Where should we have our thanks?
they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake,
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt:
No more be done:
That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,
I think it be thine, indeed, for thou liest in't.
Sings
From our achievements, though perform'd at height,
My dread lord,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms:
But what we do determine oft we break.
love, and by what more dear a better proposer could
And will not let belief take hold of him
Ay, my lord.
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
And that your grace hath screen'd and stood between
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
as if you would drive me into a toil?
I'll tent him to the quick: if he but blench,
And gem of all the nation.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
When thou liest howling.
let to know it is.
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
It is a poison temper'd by himself.
time: after your death you were better have a bad
You go to seek the Lord Hamlet, there he is.
in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the
Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in
My lord, I will be ruled,
Who's there?
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
Let's follow, 'tis not fit thus to obey him.
And, as I think, they have already order
Exit
To you in satisfaction, but if not,
Your party in converse, him you would sound,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thrall'd
We shall express our duty in his eye,
Exit Servant
Holla! Bernardo!
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
Our duty to your honour.
Before mine uncle: I'll observe his looks,
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows,
To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever
And like the kind life-rendering pelican,
yourself. But indeed, if you find him not within
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
'Tis gone, and will not answer.
How long hath she been thus?
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
What said he?
Know you the hand?
The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.
And let us once again assail your ears,
gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
That he cried out, 'twould be a sight indeed,
The very place puts toys of desperation,
The origin and commencement of his grief
And blow them at the moon: O, 'tis most sweet,
Passing through nature to eternity.
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet:
at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us
Do you know me, my lord?
in 't. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Do you doubt that?
Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains
Let him go, Gertrude, do not fear our person:
Who commands them, sir?
In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
Alas, then, she is drown'd?
Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.
What's his weapon?
You promised me to wed.
Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this,--
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
time gives it proof. I did love you once.
first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the
Why, then the Polack never will defend it.
They play
Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this fashion i'
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
No such matter: I will not sort you with the rest
But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
O me, what hast thou done?
That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,
Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
This sudden sending him away must seem
for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to
O, step between her and her fighting soul:
To give the assay of arms against your majesty.
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
All flaxen was his poll:
O, this is the poison of deep grief, it springs
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
They swear
As thou art to thyself:
Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more,
Speak to me:
And they can well on horseback: but this gallant
Madam, it so fell out, that certain players
Exeunt all but HAMLET
This above all: to thine ownself be true,
That show of such an exercise may colour
Soil our addition, and indeed it takes
Calmly, good Laertes.
And I the matter will re-word, which madness
They had begun the play--I sat me down,
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope!
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Requite him for your father.
'Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames
Look to't, I charge you: come your ways.
No, by the rood, not so:
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
offends me to the soul to hear a robustious
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
Enter Ghost
Pretty Ophelia!
tragedians of the city.
Nay, let's follow him.
'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
I cannot live to hear the news from England,
Flourish of trumpets within
At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark:
Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in 't?
Of Hamlet's wildness: so shall I hope your virtues
And even the like precurse of fierce events,
Set me the stoops of wine upon that table.
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
How now, my lord! I will the king hear this piece of work?
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
And do not spread the compost on the weeds,
[Aside]  It is the poison'd cup: it is too late.
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
Now must your conscience my acquaintance seal,
Exeunt
Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me:
By indirections find directions out:
At supper.
That else leans on the affair: pray you, make haste.
Why to a public count I might not go,
As he had been incorpsed and demi-natured
set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers-- if
His nephew's levies, which to him appear'd
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
more choler.
In censure of his seeming.
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Enter HAMLET, reading
Exeunt
I loved Ophelia: forty thousand brothers
But not express'd in fancy, rich, not gaudy,
No, not I,
The queen desires you to use some gentle
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
Thou comest in such a questionable shape
Meet what I would have well and it destroy!
To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be
Did not together pluck such envy from him
Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep,
a difference. There's a daisy: I would give you
great article, and his infusion of such dearth and
So much as from occasion you may glean,
My lord, we were sent for.
Cain's jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It
lenten entertainment the players shall receive from
In happy time.
Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
drown or hang themselves, more than their even
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole,
Ay me, what act,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,
Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.
O, vengeance!
Enter a Messenger
Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,
between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you
But with much forcing of his disposition.
gallows is built stronger than the church: argal,
The instances that second marriage move
A double blessing is a double grace,
Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murder'?
Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled,
That is but scratch'd withal: I'll touch my point
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
An eye like Mars, to threaten and command,
More honour'd in the breach than the observance.
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
There, my lord.
That can denote me truly: these indeed seem,
I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
Whose was it?
They are of Norway, sir.
Within the book and volume of my brain,
O, speak of that, that do I long to hear.
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
the top of my compass: and there is much music,
good night, good night.
mystery, you would sound me from my lowest note to
Give o'er the play.
Exeunt all but HAMLET
What ceremony else?
When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven?
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul,
O, my dear lord,--
That our devices still are overthrown,
'Tis brief, my lord.
Is not to stir without great argument,
At his head a grass-green turf,
And his sandal shoon.
Stick fiery off indeed.
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
This must not be:' and then I precepts gave her,
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not,
Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
Adieu, adieu! Hamlet, remember me.
Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
What majesty should be, what duty is,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Come, let me wipe thy face.
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing,
Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands,
By this encompassment and drift of question
I embrace it freely,
Exit
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
From top to toe?
This business is well ended.
If it be so, as so 'tis put on me,
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet:
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
For and a shrouding sheet:
They prepare to play
Happy, in that we are not over-happy,
My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
You laying these slight sullies on my son,
Here in the lobby.
Enter KING CLAUDIUS
No, by this hand.
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it,
I hope all will be well. We must be patient: but I
At gaming, swearing, or about some act
Collected from all simples that have virtue
O heavenly powers, restore him!
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing,
Hath claw'd me in his clutch,
So, gentlemen,
As make your bouts more violent to that end--
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove,
Hath there been such a time--I'd fain know that--
Ay, Hamlet.
Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd
For England.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
Into the madness wherein now he raves,
No, believe me, 'tis very cold, the wind is
Most holy and religious fear it is
You cannot call it love, for at your age
Must give us pause: there's the respect
shall be the end of my business.
If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation,
the hobby-horse is forgot.'
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
'In her excellent white bosom, these,  and c.'
The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Why, there thou say'st: and the more pity that
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,
So fast they follow, your sister's drown'd, Laertes.
Re-enter KING CLAUDIUS and POLONIUS
Speak, I am bound to hear.
Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in,
Ay, my good lord.
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Most constantly.
Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel,
To you alone.
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Where, my lord?
come, make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio, tell
Marry, well bethought:
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' the air to stick:
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
Bear't that the opposed may beware of thee.
Let it be tenable in your silence still,
start not so wildly from my affair.
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse:
ACT IV
Pluck them asunder.
Hamlet, Hamlet!
Exit Ghost
Why ask you this?
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
Give me your pardon, sir: I've done you wrong,
And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?
Enter HAMLET and Players
At home, my lord.
card, or equivocation will undo us. By the Lord,
Why, let the stricken deer go weep,
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Without more motive, into every brain
creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for
The bell then beating one,--
We think not so, my lord.
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill:
Well, God 'ild you! They say the owl was a baker's
I will watch to-night,
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
Absent thee from felicity awhile,
SCENE VII. Another room in the castle.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
We do, my lord.
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Exit
The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
And that our drift look through our bad performance,
I humbly thank you, well, well, well.
As he in his particular act and place
For they are actions that a man might play:
Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples
'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
have words to speak in thine ear will make thee
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
Very well, my lord
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.
Ay, my lord.
Enter HAMLET
Here stooping to your clemency,
Than to entreaty.
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
KING CLAUDIUS dies
When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand,
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
Rapier and dagger.
Go seek him there.
How may we try it further?
Which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very
Enter Ghost
No, not to stay the grinding of the axe,
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
A truant disposition, good my lord.
To business with the king, more than the scope
Had it the ability of life to thank you:
'twere,--I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his
very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who
Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
tears in's eyes. Pray you, no more.
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Break not your sleeps for that: you must not think
To my sick soul, as sin's true nature is,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which
Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus,
No, faith, not a jot, but to follow him thither with
But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed
god kissing carrion,--Have you a daughter?
We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot
Marry, now I can tell.
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
anon, 'tis a knavish piece of work: but what o'
from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the
But, look, where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
As if it some impartment did desire
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
That I must call't in question.
I beseech you.
through the most fond and winnowed opinions, and do
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I know no touch of it, my lord.
To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
I stay too long: but here my father comes.
sir, was Yorick's skull, the king's jester.
you:--why do you go about to recover the wind of me,
We beg your hearing patiently.
O, the recorders! let me see one. To withdraw with
No noble rite nor formal ostentation--
Was our sea-fight, and what to this was sequent
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
I shall, my lord.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And praised be rashness for it, let us know,
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,--
Should be as moral as an old man's life?
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up,
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel
No more to undertake it, I will work him
be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the
Why,
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
Giving a paper
So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
More matter, with less art.
rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
Very strangely, they say.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep,
Re-enter POLONIUS, with VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS
Sings
It is our trick, nature her custom holds,
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more:
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark,
Here's a skull now, this skull has lain in the earth
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
O, speak to me no more,
Besides, to be demanded of a sponge! what
Of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge,
Here's yet some liquor left.
him, his umbrage, nothing more.
Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
A thing, my lord!
What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
With heraldry more dismal, head to foot
Murder of Gonzago?
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here
though, I know, to divide him inventorially would
exclaim against their own succession?
The expectancy and rose of the fair state,
A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade,
They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
Give me my father!
'And in part him, but' you may say 'not well:
I will, my lord.
Therefore let's follow.
But to confront the visage of offence?
Shows itself pure, he weeps for what is done.
Over the nasty sty,--
If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Their own enactures with themselves destroy:
On plots and errors, happen.
I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Now fear I this will give it start again,
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
O, my offence is rank it smells to heaven,
Mark me.
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
withers are unwrung.
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us:
When he himself might his quietus make
yield them,
Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! I have heard
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,'
Give me leave. Here lies the water, good: here
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Colleagued with the dream of his advantage,
High on a stage be placed to the view,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing--
No, nothing but ourselves.
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife,
That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
A baseness to write fair and labour'd much
The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks
May be the devil: and the devil hath power
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
What I have said to you.
Than is my deed to my most painted word:
A very, very--pajock.
O most pernicious woman!
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
be last swallowed: when he needs what you have
For her perfections: but my revenge will come.
O, treble woe
The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared him
Dies in his own too much: that we would do
Ecstasy!
How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale:
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Where is your son?
But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son,--
i' the world.
To keep those many many bodies safe
Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
Enter GHOST and HAMLET
The better to beguile. This is for all:
My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
And you are stay'd for. There, my blessing with thee!
O, here they come.
We will haste us.
But in battalions. First, her father slain:
Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!
And where the offence is let the great axe fall.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
I love thee best, O most best, believe it. Adieu.
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of
Sings
And pity 'tis 'tis true: a foolish figure,
A touch, a touch, I do confess.
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Nay, come, again.
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.
Sleep rock thy brain,
Unmix'd with baser matter: yes, by heaven!
Come, sirs.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
What is't, Ophelia, be hath said to you?
As it is common for the younger sort
Then I will come to my mother by and by. They fool
What is the issue of the business there.
that I love passing well.
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
This?
'High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked on
Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
[To KING CLAUDIUS]  O, ho! do you mark that?
Now, mother, what's the matter?
So I do still, by these pickers and stealers.
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
My hour is almost come,
Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke,
Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
The perfume and suppliance of a minute, No more.
Happily he's the second time come to them, for they
'Thus didest thou.'
this pipe?
Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels,
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity,
The king my father!
which your modesties have not craft enough to colour:
You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt
Give you good night.
You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is--
of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest
Yet what can it when one can not repent?
How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her
Throws up another skull
But it reserved some quantity of choice,
Peace, break thee off, look, where it comes again!
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites,
Of his own just remove: the people muddied,
Her maiden strewments and the bringing home
Like to a murdering-piece, in many places
Enter LAERTES, armed, Danes following
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
Their grand commission, where I found, Horatio,--
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
It will not speak, then I will follow it.
You do remember all the circumstance?
ACT I
And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
There are the players.
He hath not fail'd to pester us with message,
I pray you, now receive them.
And--would it were not so!--you are my mother.
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man
Contagion to this world: now could I drink hot blood,
O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!
For such a guest is meet.
The terms of our estate may not endure
I think it be no other but e'en so:
might be the pate of a politician, which this ass
But let that go.
I dare not drink yet, madam, by and by.
Yes, 'faith heartily.
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern!
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
He that plays the king shall be welcome, his majesty
And can say nothing, no, not for a king,
Exit
Abuses me to damn me: I'll have grounds
And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who's there?
But answer made it none: yet once methought
herb-grace o' Sundays: O you must wear your rue with
We go to gain a little patch of ground
Therefore I have entreated him along
I am thy father's spirit,
With what, i' the name of God?
Disasters in the sun, and the moist star
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
Why, because he was mad: he shall recover his wits
And do't the speedier, that you may direct me
O heart, lose not thy nature, let not ever
Ah, ha, boy! say'st thou so? art thou there,
Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
I pray you.
Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr'd
You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Last night of all,
Exit
coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
Fare you well, my dove!
Our son shall win.
The sight is dismal,
SCENE I. A churchyard.
Against yourself: I know you are no truant.
How say you, then, would heart of man once think it?
Doubt that the sun doth move,
would come to immediate trial, if your lordship
Say you? nay, pray you, mark.
I did enact Julius Caesar: I was killed i' the
Will you ha' the truth on't? If this had not been
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said,
For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour,
Thus has he--and many more of the same bevy that I
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Sith I have cause and will and strength and means
For that which thou hast done,--must send thee hence
A piece of him.
To his confine: and of the truth herein
These hands are not more like.
If I had play'd the desk or table-book,
Give first admittance to the ambassadors,
And at our more consider'd time well read,
Both your majesties
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
We heard it all. My lord, do as you please,
Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
Which bewept to the grave did go
It could not move thus.
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
For, though I am not splenitive and rash,
That hurts by easing. But, to the quick o' the ulcer:--
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
Exeunt
And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
But how hath she
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak,
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
When second husband kisses me in bed.
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
And call it accident.
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
The canker galls the infants of the spring,
By Gis and by Saint Charity,
Here's the commission: read it at more leisure.
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays:
For he himself is subject to his birth:
borne me on his back a thousand times, and now, how
But where was this?
cannot play upon me.
Delay it not, I'll have him hence to-night:
Am I not i' the right, old Jephthah?
Come on--you hear this fellow in the cellarage--
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
Then is doomsday near: but your news is not true.
It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself.
And these few precepts in thy memory
[Within]  My lord, my lord,--
Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh,
Reads
A bloody deed! almost as bad, good mother,
He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Why, look you there! look, how it steals away!
I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was
Ungarter'd, and down-gyved to his ancle,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall,
against six French swords, their assigns, and three
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
Drabbing: you may go so far.
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
it would not much approve me. Well, sir?
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
I thank you: keep the door. O thou vile king,
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd:
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother.
about to say? By the mass, I was about to say
I did repel his fetters and denied
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
[Rising]  My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:
He never gave commandment for their death.
Could not so mope.
Lifts up the array and discovers POLONIUS
Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
Of my true mother.
Of your precedent lord, a vice of kings,
I do repent: but heaven hath pleased it so,
My lord, I have news to tell you.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
But, look, amazement on thy mother sits:
A hit, a very palpable hit.
Then I would you were so honest a man.
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Nothing, neither way.
Without the sensible and true avouch
It shall do well: but yet do I believe
Till then, in patience our proceeding be.
Is she to be buried in Christian burial that
Hold off your hands.
mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.
the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Till by some elder masters, of known honour,
What news, my lord?
And what's in prayer but this two-fold force,
With variable objects shall expel
Good my lord, will you see the players well
My lord, you once did love me.
And our affairs from England come too late:
On Mars's armour forged for proof eterne
Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd
And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
Do you think 'tis this?
But never doubt I love.
know himself.
were better my mother had not borne me: I am very
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
No, by no means.
It did me yeoman's service: wilt thou know
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
To show us so much gentry and good will
for the most part are capable of nothing but
At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
My lord, the queen would speak with you, and
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Enter FORTINBRAS, a Captain, and Soldiers, marching
Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
But not by him.
Gertrude, do not drink.
coming, to offer you service.
me like thieves of mercy: but they knew what they
Of general assault.
They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase
Both to my God and to my gracious king:
you, sir, it comes from the ambassador that was
or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.
Or not at all.
Exit Second Clown
SCENE II. Another room in the castle.
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same covenant,
knocked about the mazzard with a sexton's spade:
I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king,
The apparition comes: I knew your father,
Nor shall you do mine ear that violence,
They are not near my conscience, their defeat
Up from my cabin,
A dead march. Exeunt, bearing off the dead bodies, after which a peal of ordnance is shot off
SCENE III. A room in the castle.
Give him the cup.
SCENE II. A hall in the castle.
I tell thee she is: and therefore make her grave
Enter HAMLET
The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
Giving to you no further personal power
Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:
'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
Bear Hamlet, like a soldier, to the stage,
with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
What does this mean, my lord?
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
The effect of what I wrote?
And I a maid at your window,
Look, my lord, it comes!
welcome to Elsinore.
And will he not come again?
Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right
And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
Before my daughter told me--what might you,
And hears it roar beneath.
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
[Sings]
As woman's love.
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Ha, ha! are you honest?
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
As e'er my conversation coped withal.
we'll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste
But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof,
Peace! who comes here?
So, proceed you.
I think nothing, my lord.
Alas, how is't with you,
Let's follow, Gertrude:
my stops, you would pluck out the heart of my
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
That I, the son of a dear father murder'd,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Upon what ground?
Bring him before us.
What do you think of me?
as many of your players do, I had as lief the
Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
But that I know love is begun by time,
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror:
Now I am alone.
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
A whoreson mad fellow's it was: whose do you think it was?
[Within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
Upon my life, Lamond.
O, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
What are they that would speak with me?
you.
Enter four or five Players
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes,
I have, my lord.
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
live, the rest shall keep as they are. To a
I hear him coming: let's withdraw, my lord.
strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of
in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
Or like a whale?
For England!
flagon of Rhenish on my head once. This same skull,
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
With all my imperfections on my head:
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.
majesty, 'tis the breathing time of day with me, let
Why, what should be the fear?
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
shall use his foil and target, the lover shall not
They were given me by Claudio, he received them
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The safety and health of this whole state,
Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,
Take thy fair hour, Laertes, time be thine,
southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.
And with such cozenage--is't not perfect conscience,
I could not but by her. The other motive,
You go not till I set you up a glass
Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Sings
the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
at this line: let me see, let me see--
might it not?
myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I
Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her,
To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
Thy loving father, Hamlet.
My good friends, I'll leave you till night: you are
Sir, I cannot.
Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow,
Now falls on Priam.
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,
Such an act
indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
And where tis so, the offender's scourge is weigh'd,
all, believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Come, for the third, Laertes: you but dally,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
That hath a stomach in't, which is no other--
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
that our last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.
force of honesty can translate beauty into his
SCENE III. A room in Polonius' house.
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en
With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts,--
My lord, you played once i' the university, you say?
Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
How all occasions do inform against me,
Yea, from the table of my memory
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a seal'd compact,
To serve in such a difference. What devil was't
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
And makes as healthful music: it is not madness
I'll warrant you,
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
to see thee well. Welcome, good friends. O, my old
o'erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted
I' faith, if he be not rotten before he die--as we
Be all my sins remember'd.
Ay, my lord,
I would you did, sir, yet, in faith, if you did,
'Tis here!
And as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Give me some light: away!
Awake the god of day, and, at his warning,
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
No, no, the drink, the drink,--O my dear Hamlet,--
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
Had I but time--as this fell sergeant, death,
The time invites you, go, your servants tend.
What, are they children? who maintains 'em? how are
thousand pound. Didst perceive?
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Exeunt
there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases,
Come, go with me: I will go seek the king.
Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious, so please you,
She desires to speak with you in her closet, ere you
When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
Ay, so, God be wi' ye,
But, better look'd into, he truly found
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
Aside
Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not budge,
Is't possible?
Speak to her, Hamlet.
He is dead and gone,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
No, my good lord, but, as you did command,
Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
It was against your highness: whereat grieved,
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
How absolute the knave is! we must speak by the
your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air,
they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no
If damned custom have not brass'd it so
Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and
his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
I think their inhibition comes by the means of the
So much for this, sir: now shall you see the other,
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is 'For, O, for, O,
Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, LAERTES, Lords, OSRIC, and Attendants with foils,  and c
lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.
'Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too,
If by direct or by collateral hand
Exit
But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them:
you deny your griefs to your friend.
Are mortised and adjoin'd, which, when it falls,
it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
I'll rant as well as thou.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament,
Exeunt
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
They play
I do not fear it, I have seen you both:
hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
An understanding simple and unschool'd:
Look here, upon this picture, and on this,
Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun.
O, yet defend me, friends, I am but hurt.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Of impious stubbornness, 'tis unmanly grief,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
What dost you mean by this?
Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
How is't, Laertes?
Heavens make our presence and our practises
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!
Nay, do not think I flatter,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
I have seen nothing.
Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
is something musty.
His father's death, and our o'erhasty marriage.
Enter QUEEN GERTRUDE and POLONIUS
The head is not more native to the heart,
Save yourself, my lord:
And there I see such black and grained spots
O, give me leave:
What out of this, my lord?
here's fine revolution, an we had the trick to
Exit
Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame!
This nothing's more than matter.
And many such-like 'As'es of great charge,
To give the world assurance of a man:
So would I ha' done, by yonder sun,
'Tis very strange.
Have burst their cerements, why the sepulchre,
How now! what news?
I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for
Mad for thy love?
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
A man that fortune's buffets and rewards
That he is open to incontinency,
How fares my lord?
this month, you shall nose him as you go up the
If this should blast in proof. Soft! let me see:
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the
Play something like the murder of my father
No, my lord.
Such was the very armour he had on
Subscribed it, gave't the impression, placed it safely,
natural, if philosophy could find it out.
For art and exercise in your defence
I shall obey, my lord.
wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o' the worst.
Methinks it is like a weasel.
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and
Not a mouse stirring.
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
but to play at loggats with 'em? mine ache to think on't.
So runs the world away.
Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour:
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid
That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
Enter another Gentleman
Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well,
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
Ay, very well, my lord.
Lest with this piteous action you convert
How now, Ophelia!
Should have kept short, restrain'd and out of haunt,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May,
And let him know so.
does well, but how does it well? it does well to
As it behoves my daughter and your honour.
'Swounds, show me what thou'lt do:
Being a thing immortal as itself?
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
'Tis most true:
If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
And so, without more circumstance at all,
Swear by my sword.
[Drawing]  How now! a rat? Dead, for a ducat, dead!
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
I am constant to my purpose, they follow the king's
Friend, look to 't.
'Tis a quick lie, sir, 'twill away gain, from me to
As therein are set down.
And meant to wreck thee, but, beshrew my jealousy!
Hast ta'en with equal thanks: and blest are those
Let his queen mother all alone entreat him
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
Exit
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears
Re-enter OPHELIA
He's fat, and scant of breath.
Sings
To give them seals never, my soul, consent!
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
Ay, lady, 'twas my word.
This unprevailing woe, and think of us
great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter,--
foolish ear.
Whips out his rapier, cries, 'A rat, a rat!'
This presence knows,
Do you think I meant country matters?
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Enter LAERTES and OPHELIA
That has no relish of salvation in't,
Sir?
I know you are not ignorant--
do, surely, bar the door upon your own liberty, if
Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN
Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine
O, he is mad, Laertes.
fool no where but in's own house. Farewell.
Season your admiration for awhile
Will he tell us what this show meant?
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard,
How should I your true love know
Enter LUCIANUS
more willingly part withal: except my life, except
To give these mourning duties to your father:
Let shame say what it will: when these are gone,
And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught--
Exit First Player
And will this brother's wager frankly play.
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
That's good, 'mobled queen' is good.
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away:
He is gone, he is gone,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you,
One word more, good lady.
The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
O God, your only jig-maker. What should a man do
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Leave me, friends.
Then is the world one.
So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less,
fashion, and so berattle the common stages--so they
Nay, but, Ophelia,--
And after we will both our judgments join
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it
They bear the mandate, they must sweep my way,
No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize,
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
Let me question more in particular: what have you,
And not where I had aim'd them.
Alexander returneth into dust, the dust is earth, of
Shall in the general censure take corruption
dumb, yet are they much too light for the bore of
'Tis Hamlets character. 'Naked!
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
Deliberate pause: diseases desperate grown
To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me:
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
No more but so?
could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will
But, if't be he I mean, he's very wild,
the body. The king is a thing--
breed. If it shall please you to make me a
Such dear concernings hide? who would do so?
And in the porches of my ears did pour
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,
Exit POLONIUS
the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The
Exit HORATIO
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Let us impart what we have seen to-night
[Sings]
This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
And will he not come again?
They cry 'Choose we: Laertes shall be king:'
The king and queen and all are coming down.
Ay, my lord, they stay upon your patience.
KING CLAUDIUS puts LAERTES' hand into HAMLET's
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of
Last, and as much containing as all these,
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
For Hecuba!
Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole,--
is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
You must translate: 'tis fit we understand them.
A dream itself is but a shadow.
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.
Quoth she, before you tumbled me,
Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal!
question to thee: if thou answerest me not to the
As of a father: for let the world take note,
My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young
Enter POLONIUS
is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is
I warrant it will.
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
I'll play this bout first, set it by awhile. Come.
thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of
As harbingers preceding still the fates
Will not debate the question of this straw:
At 'closes in the consequence,' ay, marry,
Did he receive you well?
be my lord such-a-one, that praised my lord
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Must render up myself.
Drown'd! O, where?
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
Where wilt thou lead me? speak, I'll go no further.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself,
you seem to say so.
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
And passion in the gods.'
And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
From me, whose love was of that dignity
Or then, or then, with such, or such, and, as you say,
Received his love?
the daintier sense.
As low as to the fiends!'
Exit
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
My lord, I have news to tell you.
Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia!
To show his grief: let her be round with him,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
To all that fortune, death and danger dare,
Come short of what he did.
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent:
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:
Will you two help to hasten them?
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
It must be 'se offendendo,' it cannot be else. For
But these cannot I command to any utterance of
Good my lord!
O, fear me not.
And it must follow, as the night the day,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
Enter two Players, King and Queen
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,
Exeunt Players
How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself,
unmannerly.
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
By laboursome petition, and at last
and boy, thirty years.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
Away! for every thing is seal'd and done
Was gaged by our king, which had return'd
You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
What is the matter, my lord?
For what advancement may I hope from thee
To thine own peace. If he be now return'd,
I cannot dream of: I entreat you both,
And call the noblest to the audience.
Whose spirit with divine ambition puff'd
Wherefore should you do this?
As may dishonour him, take heed of that,
I had forgot: 'tis so concluded on.
Mass, I cannot tell.
That I have utter'd: bring me to the test,
O heavy deed!
And to the manner born, it is a custom
Look you, these are the stops.
Exit HORATIO
his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be
Answer, and think upon this business.
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,
And I beseech you instantly to visit
Enter two Clowns, with spades,  and c
Friends both, go join you with some further aid:
To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
Exit
SCENE I. Elsinore. A platform before the castle.
'But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen--'
mirror up to nature, to show virtue her own feature,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,
A serpent stung me, so the whole ear of Denmark
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
Well, good night.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz:
easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what
[Sings]
Bernardo has my place.
your clowns speak no more than is set down for them,
With this slave's offal: bloody, bawdy villain!
wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir,
no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Think it no more,
Look, whether he has not turned his colour and has
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
What we have two nights seen.
For this effect defective comes by cause:
the king's mess: 'tis a chough, but, as I say,
It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane:
Nay, come, let's go together.
have the letters I have sent, and repair thou to me
To cut his throat i' the church.
All my smooth body.
You are welcome, masters, welcome, all. I am glad
more, but to the matter: my mother, you say,--
Is it not like the king?
The devil himself.
'twas so indeed.
Old grandsire Priam seeks.'
Nay, I know not.
here lies the point:  if I drown myself wittingly,
Pray you, be round with him.
Will you be ruled by me?
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,
Ay, sir, what of him?
But keep a farm and carters.
Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me!
To my revenge: but in my terms of honour
To the unsatisfied.
The leperous distilment, whose effect
Than your particular demands will touch it:
But is this law?
Good my lord, be quiet.
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
Exit POLONIUS
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
This realm dismantled was
To desperation turn my trust and hope!
Never to speak of this that you have heard,
It shall as level to your judgment pierce
No traveller returns, puzzles the will
Of his behavior.
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
Must I remember? why, she would hang on him,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed?
O Hamlet, speak no more:
you could go backward.
O, a pit of clay for to be made
[Within]	Heaven secure him!
Enter OPHELIA
'Tis strange.
Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him, Horatio: a fellow
'Tis heavy with him: and am I then revenged,
My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
My lord, I do not know,
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Give me the cup: let go, by heaven, I'll have't.
We shall, my lord.
What is the reason that you use me thus?
Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!
The devil take thy soul!
Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.
Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
That I can keep your counsel and not mine own.
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king:
A ministering angel shall my sister be,
Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric,
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall:
That I might be the organ.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?
The Attendants part them, and they come out of the grave
[Within]                Let her come in.
[Beneath]  Swear.
presently.
Of the unworthiest siege.
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
What hour now?
Sweets to the sweet: farewell!
for argument, unless the poet and the player went to
Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,--
And for my means, I'll husband them so well,
As kill a king, and marry with his brother.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN
SCENE V. Elsinore. A room in the castle.
More relative than this: the play 's the thing
Why, now you speak
I would I had been there.
And never come mischance between us twain!
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
In general synod 'take away her power,
Very good, my lord.
And not have strew'd thy grave.
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
Re-enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
And he, repulsed--a short tale to make--
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
In obstinate condolement is a course
fellows are perfect in the great commanders' names:
Had the fore-hand and vantage of a king.
Which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the king
And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's tomb,
That might annoy my finger? 'tis so strange,
King Pepin's title and Hugh Capet's claim,
Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,
they purpose their services. Besides, there is no
Up in the air, crown'd with the golden sun,
Here, Fluellen, wear thou this favour for me and
Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries,
Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt,
proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we
To his full height. On, on, you noblest English.
Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing,
That this fair action may on foot be brought.
Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests
Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.
That's mercy, but too much security:
Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,
The poor mechanic porters crowding in
Enter GOWER and WILLIAMS
The king is full of grace and fair regard.
Should with his lion gait walk the whole world,
In cash most justly paid.
desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat,
That knew'st the very bottom of my soul,
That I do brag thus! This your air of France
That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants,
In little room confining mighty men,
Ca, ha! he bounds from the earth, as if his
That do no work to-day!
Exit
O, Signieur Dew should be a gentleman:
It is with a good will, I can tell you, it will
Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger,
I dare say you love him not so ill, to wish him here
How canst thou make me satisfaction?
Whereof take you one quarter into France,
SCENE IV. The field of battle.
There is the playhouse now, there must you sit:
I assure you, there is very excellent services
PROLOGUE
Of my nation! What ish my nation? Ish a villain,
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you.
I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
To hold in right and title of the female:
God's will! my liege, would you and I alone,
Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting
broke any man's head but his own, and that was
je m'estime heureux que je suis tombe entre les
throats to be cut, and works to be done, and there
To order peace between them, and omit
List his discourse of war, and you shall hear
therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest a'
And in a captive chariot into Rouen
first stroke, I'll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier.
For now sits Expectation in the air,
see the man, that has but two legs, that shall find
world he is: if I find a hole in his coat, I will
Good Corporal Nym, show thy valour, and put up your sword.
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the
And so our scene must to the battle fly,
So, if a son that is by his father sent about
The emptying of our fathers' luxury,
perfectly I love her, and that is good English.
Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow,
Perpend my words, O Signieur Dew, and mark,
About our squares of battle, were enow
Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much
Trust none,
And we'll consign thereto. Will you, fair sister,
As, by a lower but loving likelihood,
bonnet: then, if ever thou darest acknowledge it, I
mine, for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. I
person, kneeling at our feet, but a weak and
I embrace it.
Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,
cudgels. God b' wi' you, and keep you, and heal your pate.
heart of flattery about me, I cannot so conjure up
of the Romans.
O'er France and all her almost kingly dukedoms,
The plain-song is most just: for humours do abound:
And any thing that may not misbecome
soar, I am a hawk: he trots the air, the earth
Their cheeks are paper. Why, what read you there
I pray you and beseech you that you will.
With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,
Did push it out of farther question.
all bubukles, and whelks, and knobs, and flames o'
A little cloth.
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead
How shall I know thee again?
Shall be a wall sufficient to defend
This dangerous treason lurking in our way
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks:
fellow of it.
Be friends, you English fools, be friends: we have
Exeunt
So may a thousand actions, once afoot.
Or nicely charge your understanding soul
And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.
That may give furtherance to our expedition,
I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly
Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
how many is killed?
Think'st thou the fiery fever will go out
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
By my troth, he'll yield the crow a pudding one of
We will aboard to night. Why, how now, gentlemen!
It is the soldier's, I by bargain should
That shall fly with them: for many a thousand widows
'Tis certain he hath pass'd the river Somme.
La main, de hand, les doigts, de fingres. Je pense
to consign to.
As many arrows, loosed several ways,
Well. I will do it, though I take thee in the
Never sees horrid night, the child of hell,
At Herod's bloody-hunting slaughtermen.
Who, holding in disdain the German women
But his own wringing! What infinite heart's-ease
Now entertain conjecture of a time
The lazy yawning drone. I this infer,
The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,
The king hath note of all that they intend,
maiden walls that war hath never entered.
He might return to vasty Tartar back,
Description cannot suit itself in words
Are now confined two mighty monarchies,
Was not devised for the realm of France:
And these he masters now: now he weighs time
Like little body with a mighty heart,
And Edward Duke of Bar: of lusty earls,
imputation of his wickedness by your rule, should be
desired in the hearts of his subjects: I would fain
And I will take up that with 'Give the devil his due.'
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
For, hearing this, I must perforce compound
humour to knock you indifferently well. If you grow
Such outward things dwell not in my desires:
Where ne'er from France arrived more happy men.
sun-burning, that never looks in his glass for love
If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.
For in the book of Numbers is it writ,
Even so our houses and ourselves and children
The fewer men, the greater share of honour.
which they trick up with new-tuned oaths: and what
In motion of no less celerity
Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on,
the grund for it, ay, or go to death, and ay'll pay
tell you, captain, if you look in the maps of the
Upon his royal face there is no note
De elbow. Je m'en fais la repetition de tous les
No, faith, is't not, Kate: but thy speaking of my
Petit monsieur, que dit-il?
Will you be so good, scauld knave, as eat it?
O then belike she was old and gentle, and you rode,
To do your grace incessant services.
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not,
Discolour: and so Montjoy, fare you well.
you mock at an ancient tradition, begun upon an
that is certain, and of great expedition and
The sense of reckoning, if the opposed numbers
Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under your
Bardolph, be blithe: Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins:
How terrible in constant resolution,
Thou never shalt hear herald any more.
Turning the accomplishment of many years
of my mouth, ere it is made and finished. I speak
You have an excellent armour, but let my horse have his due.
Though all that I can do is nothing worth,
I stand here for him: what to him from England?
my uttermost power: he is not-God be praised and
Appear before us? We'll yet enlarge that man,
such proverb so little kin to the purpose.
But five and twenty. O God, thy arm was here,
For you shall read that my great-grandfather
Witness our too much memorable shame
Offer'st me brass?
Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,
We are but warriors for the working-day,
Exeunt PISTOL, and French Soldier
Received the golden earnest of our death,
Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours:
And leave your England, as dead midnight still,
stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that, when
cares of it, and the forms of it, and the sobriety
For it is none but thine!
Which of a weak or niggardly projection
Wouldst thou have practised on me for thy use,
De sin. Le col, de nick, de menton, de sin.
I am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may
Take up the English short, and let them know
That shall first spring and be most delicate.
A city on the inconstant billows dancing,
Like to the senators of the antique Rome,
examine the wars of Pompey the Great, you shall
I am not Barbason, you cannot conjure me. I have an
Your majesty says very true: if your majesties is
It is the best horse of Europe.
worthless satisfaction. To this add defiance: and
And hides a sword from hilts unto the point
I'll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.
After defunction of King Pharamond,
I say gud-day, Captain Fluellen.
And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.
With titles blown from adulation?
The English are embattled, you French peers.
virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the
Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds,
A' could never abide carnation, 'twas a colour he
and yielding.
Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?
I humbly pray them to admit the excuse
Promised to Harry and his followers.
Except, O signieur, thou do give to me
Like a base pander, hold the chamber-door
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of
Look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is
bosom, if ever man went to Arthur's bosom. A' made
them. Come, I know thou lovest me: and at night,
Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance:
The day is yours.
wing. Therefore when he sees reason of fears, as we
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
manhood, what an arrant, rascally, beggarly, lousy
Nay, it will please him well, Kate it shall please
Hark, how our steeds for present service neigh!
Come, let's away. My love, give me thy lips.
Exit
You pay him then. That's a perilous shot out of an
The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll,
Warwick and Huntingdon, go with the king,
Enter the KING OF FRANCE, the DAUPHIN, the DUKE oF BOURBON, the Constable Of France, and others
Enter KATHARINE and ALICE
Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?
Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
Where your majesty demands, that the King of France,
directions in the true disciplines of the wars, look
Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach
To look our dead, and then to bury them,
Est-il impossible d'echapper la force de ton bras?
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Ambassadors from Harry King of England
The mettle of your pasture, let us swear
But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?
You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me,
To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great king,
Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines.
By Jeshu, I am your majesty's countryman, I care not
But what prevention?
Exeunt some Attendants
My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin:
imposed upon his father that sent him: or if a
unspotted soldiers: some peradventure have on them
What rub or what impediment there is,
Moy shall not serve, I will have forty moys,
And, but for ceremony, such a wretch,
my way shall be paved with English faces.
To answer matters of this consequence.
God's arm strike with us! 'tis a fearful odds.
Delivering o'er to executors pale
Behold the ordnance on their carriages,
Flourish. The King and his train enter the town
Latin, Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus, Rex
Now forth, lord constable and princes all,
henceforth let a Welsh correction teach you a good
The king hath heard them, to the which as yet
Whom he hath dull'd and cloy'd with gracious favours,
off. Je quand sur le possession de France, et quand
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin
That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.
this is the glove of Alencon, that your majesty is
King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear
Therefore, go speak: the duke will hear thy voice:
The master of the cross-bows, Lord Rambures,
against a post when he was drunk. They will steal
Success and conquest to attend on us.
Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal, I
never liked.
That is the word. I thee defy again.
As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots
I think he would not wish himself any where but
Angliae, et Haeres Franciae.
places stops the mouth of all find-faults, as I will
Grandpre and Roussi, Fauconberg and Foix,
To welcome him! much more, and much more cause,
painted blind, with a muffler afore her eyes, to
SCENE VII. Another part of the field.
C'est assez pour une fois: allons-nous a diner.
Wherein thou art less happy being fear'd
Exit
the friend of France, for I love France so well that
Pish!
In second accent of his ordnance.
We never valued this poor seat of England,
According to the weight and worthiness.
Not so, I do beseech your majesty.
Enter FLUELLEN
As young as I am, I have observed these three
O Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox,
The morning's danger, and their gesture sad
had ten times more valour than this roaring devil i'
He is called Aunchient Pistol.
Your highness, lately sending into France,
Ere he take ship for France, and in Southampton.
Receive each other. God speak this Amen!
Away, you rogue!
you, is digt himself four yard under the
To find his title with some shows of truth,
And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
Exeunt
Descend unto the daughter. Gracious lord,
Katharine his daughter, and with her, to dowry,
fly from God: war is his beadle, war is vengeance,
Is at this day in Germany call'd Meisen.
Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs
king's company.
gallant king!
Forage in blood of French nobility.
I have but with a cursorary eye
ne'er the wiser.
Not measuring what use we made of them.
With busy hammers closing rivets up,
endure cold as another man's sword will: and
the king's laws in now the king's quarrel: where
Stand in our way. There's for thy labour, Montjoy.
And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best
yet, when they stoop, they stoop with the like
Those waters from me which I would have stopp'd,
scurvy, lousy knave, God pless you!
The fig of Spain!
Exeunt
By interception which they dream not of.
to slomber, ay'll de gud service, or ay'll lig i'
From whom you claim, invoke his warlike spirit,
for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom, the
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.
As ever you came of women, come in quickly to Sir
sure will hang upon my tongue like a new-married
Well then the peace,
Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies
But I do not desire he should answer for me, and
Could not keep quiet in his conscience,
Kate, I cannot look greenly nor gasp out my
And sword and shield,
Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of
What's he?
SCENE II. France. A royal palace.
Or break it all to pieces: or there we'll sit,
Monmouth caps, which, your majesty know, to this
De nails. Ecoutez, dites-moi, si je parle bien: de
I doubt not that, since we are well persuaded
arrant a villain and a Jacksauce, as ever his black
Therefore let our proportions for these wars
How things are perfected.
An Englishman?
Let housewifery appear: keep close, I thee command.
all mine: and, Kate, when France is mine and I am
And plodded like a man for working-days,
Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
How many would the peaceful city quit,
The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
That, though the truth of it stands off as gross
Were better than a churlish turf of France.
words, and keeps whole weapons. For Nym, he hath
That goddess blind,
and so I shall catch the fly, your cousin, in the
right, because he hath not the gift to woo in other
fire: and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.
Upon the king! let us our lives, our souls,
Ride thou unto the horsemen on yon hill:
He'll make your Paris Louvre shake for it,
you be so pashful? your shoes is not so good: 'tis
Daughter to Charlemain, who was the son
honourable respect, and worn as a memorable trophy of
And bids you be advised there's nought in France
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
Let gallows gape for dog, let man go free
As I perceived his grace would fain have done,
Of our fair cousin Dauphin, for we hear
SCENE III. London. Before a tavern.
Farewell, hostess.
satisfy my opinion, and partly for the satisfaction,
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.
Knowest thou Gower?
For who is he, whose chin is but enrich'd
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints,
You are too much mistaken in this king:
senses have but human conditions: his ceremonies
other particularities.
a wooden dagger, and they are both hanged, and so
With sunken wreck and sunless treasuries.
So great an object: can this cockpit hold
We judge no less. Uncle of Exeter,
Kissing her
But there's a saying very old and true,
God quit you in his mercy! Hear your sentence.
my horse to my mistress.
Brother, we shall. Go, uncle Exeter,
it was excess of wine that set him on,
Commend me to the princes in our camp,
the military discipline, that is the point.
Bardolph, a soldier, firm and sound of heart,
For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
Poor miserable wretches, to your death:
yours, then yours is France and you are mine.
I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well:
Enter NYM, BARDOLPH, PISTOL, and Boy
Let us die in honour: once more back again,
Lucifer and Belzebub himself, it is necessary, look
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.
The King of Scots, whom she did send to France,
me but as a common man, witness the night, your
Captain Fluellen!
Shall see advantageable for our dignity,
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys,
great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the
Do, with his smirch'd complexion, all fell feats
brothers in filching, and in Calais they stole a
do the office of a warming-pan. Faith, he's very ill.
Corrupting in its own fertility.
O pardonnez moi!
For 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,
king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come to
Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
May I with right and conscience make this claim?
I cannot kiss, that is the humour of it, but, adieu.
Enter our gates, dispose of us and ours,
Say'st thou me so? is that a ton of moys?
Thus says my king: Say thou to Harry of England:
They did, Fluellen.
Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirch'd
Jaques of Chatillon, admiral of France,
I know thy errand, I will go with thee:
They know your grace hath cause and means and might,
Poor we may call them in their native lords.
And more than carefully it us concerns
But that the Scot on his unfurnish'd kingdom
we'll be all three sworn brothers to France: let it
For the only she, and--pauca, there's enough. Go to.
the war, the Roman wars, in the way of argument,
shall be as it may. I dare not fight, but I will
Were it the mistress-court of mighty Europe:
give me, in your conscience, now?
the wars do as every sick man in his bed, wash every
foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone,
will make it my quarrel.
Les ongles? nous les appelons de nails.
garments, your lowliness, and what your highness
mote out of his conscience: and dying so, death
So swift a pace hath thought that even now
All offences, my lord, come from the heart: never
My Lord of Burgundy, we'll take your oath,
Did, as heir general, being descended
Corporal Nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends:
list of a country's fashion: we are the makers of
What is his name.
But we in it shall be remember'd,
Certainly, aunchient, it is not a thing to rejoice
But could be willing to march on to Calais
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.
to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. If you
adventurously. I must stay with the lackeys, with
Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten
With hearts create of duty and of zeal.
were troth-plight to her.
course truly. If thou would have such a one, take
It sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captains bath:
Let us not live in France, let us quit all
To purge this field of such a hilding foe,
once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus:
To tear and havoc more than she can eat.
Why the law Salique that they have in France
We kept together in our chivalry!'
Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear it in my
How now, Fluellen! camest thou from the bridge?
Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,
can rhyme themselves into ladies' favours, they do
Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
them, some upon the debts they owe, some upon their
Until four hundred one and twenty years
Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
Enter MONTJOY
cold as any stone, then I felt to his knees, and
Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,
Thus far, with rough and all-unable pen,
A short alarum
is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him we
eloquence, nor I have no cunning in protestation,
Since that my penitence comes after all,
'No woman shall succeed in Salique land:'
When creeping murmur and the poring dark
soldier keep his oath?
Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep,
when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we
Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.
With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning:
Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs,
For I am sure, when he shall see our army,
like a kern of Ireland, your French hose off, and in
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
Should be maintain'd, assembled and collected,
O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,
If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating
bidding of a monarch and his countenance enforces homage.
I tell you what, Captain Gower, I do perceive he is
and eat, I swear--
When all her chivalry hath been in France
With rainy marching in the painful field,
music and thy English broken, therefore, queen of
From camp to camp through the foul womb of night
With profitable labour, to his grave:
Tucket. Enter MONTJOY
the approach of day.
I would have her learn, my fair cousin, how
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.
galling at this gentleman twice or thrice. You
Up to the breach, you dogs! avaunt, you cullions!
And so the prince obscured his contemplation
Why, I pray you, is not pig great? the pig, or the
Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.
Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham:
inconstant, and mutability, and variation: and her
Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,
You would desire the king were made a prelate:
Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood,
Enter GLOUCESTER, BEDFORD, EXETER, ERPINGHAM, with all his host: SALISBURY and WESTMORELAND
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by,
are full of deceits?
just and his quarrel honourable.
'Solus,' egregious dog? O viper vile!
With torch-staves in their hand, and their poor jades
While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.
their damnation than he was before guilty of those
And thence to France shall we convey you safe,
Runs in your veins, and my thrice-puissant liege
his face, if he be not fellow with the best king,
mark Alexander's life well, Harry of Monmouth's life
--a most contagious treason come to light, look
The king's a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
look you, this leek: because, look you, you do not
blessed!--any hurt in the world, but keeps the
To give you gentle pass, for, if we may,
Je pense que vous etes gentilhomme de bonne qualite.
Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remercimens, et
What was the impediment that broke this off?
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
Were all thy children kind and natural!
Shame and eternal shame, nothing but shame!
You would say it hath been all in all his study:
Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance,
His daughter first, and then in sequel all,
livest, dear Kate, take a fellow of plain and
you, as you shall desire in a summer's day. Here is
Follow your spirit, and upon this charge
Enter GLOUCESTER
He is full of valour as of kindness,
They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,
To demonstrate the life of such a battle
Wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank,
From him the native and true challenger.
Make claim and title to the crown of France.
What is it then to me, if impious war,
Shake in their fear and with pale policy
Even as your horse bears your praises, who would
Have lost their quality, and that this day
Take pity of your town and of your people,
The French, advised by good intelligence
To give each naked curtle-axe a stain,
It may be his enemy is a gentleman of great sort,
ACT V
That now I will have: that's the humour of it.
alone, howsoever you speak this to feel other men's
What a long night is this! I will not change my
O well a day, Lady, if he be not drawn now! we
Exit
Here's my glove: give me another of thine.
PROLOGUE
Of malady of France,
Enter Chorus
appeles de fingres, oui, de fingres.
appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing
A testament of noble-ending love.
appelez-vous le col?
There's not a piece of feather in our host--
bridge as you shall see in a summer's day. But it
Comest thou again for ransom?
Prepare we for our marriage--on which day,
liberte, le franchisement.
When capital crimes, chew'd, swallow'd and digested,
Issue to me, that the contending kingdoms
On, on, on, on, on! to the breach, to the breach!
That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,
Like music.
That nothing do but meditate on blood,--
You have shot over.
Harry the king, Bedford and Exeter,
The vapour of our valour will o'erturn them.
Where is Montjoy the herald? speed him hence:
Shall be to you, as us, like glorious.
I stay but for my guidon: to the field!
The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.
If we may pass, we will, if we be hinder'd,
Alarum, and chambers go off
Great Kings of France and England! That I have labour'd,
voutsafe me, look you, a few disputations with you,
beauty, can do no more, spoil upon my face: thou
uncoined constancy, for he perforce must do thee
If not, why, in a moment look to see
Brass, cur!
opportunity to be required, look you, I will be so
So are you, princes English, every one.
and there is an end.
With patches, colours, and with forms being fetch'd
Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.
Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard.
Your mistress bears well.
When articles too nicely urged be stood on.
A little touch of Harry in the night.
Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom,
To sit with us once more, with better heed
Prince of Wales, as I have read in the chronicles,
minds: methinks I could not die any where so
Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales,
is good for your green wound and your ploody coxcomb.
In blood of princes, and their wounded steeds
For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.
But see thy fault! France hath in thee found out
is come after it indifferent well, for there is
Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,
Nor never Hydra-headed wilfulness
Nay, that's right, but why wear you your leek today?
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur.
deceits: dat is de princess.
De neck, madame.
Ay, or more than we should seek after, for we know
two hundred crowns.
And sheathed their swords for lack of argument:
Well then I know thee: what shall I know of thee?
Qualtitie calmie custure me! Art thou a gentleman?
my father's ambition! he was thinking of civil wars
be it spoken. I should quickly leap into a wife.
Their bodies to the lust of English youth
Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
'Through, in pure truth, it was corrupt and naught,
For I can take, and Pistol's cock is up,
Of what a monarchy you are the head:
this slaughter: besides, they have burned and
flowers and smile upon his fingers' ends, I knew
High dukes, great princes, barons, lords and knights,
And all-admiring with an inward wish
Driving them forward
To make against your highness' claim to France
Let that one article rank with the rest,
They bid us to the English dancing-schools,
Think you not that the powers we bear with us
Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meetest the fellow.
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
And on it have bestow'd more contrite tears
That island of England breeds very valiant
Under what captain serve you?
Now all the youth of England are on fire,
thought not good to bruise an injury till it were
Russian bear and have their heads crushed like
Farewell, adieu.
therefore consider of his ransom, which must
Convey them with safe conduct. Fare you well.
majesty, and your great-uncle Edward the Plack
dare not swear thou lovest me, yet my blood begins to
No, for my manly heart doth yearn.
Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns,
Dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of
Enter Messenger
His heart is fracted and corroborate.
You English princes all, I do salute you.
mots que vous m'avez appris des a present.
be as it may: though patience be a tired mare, yet
My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.
To furnish him with all appertinents
I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a sow
Leash'd in like hounds, should famine, sword and fire
clap hands and a bargain: how say you, lady?
I come to thee for charitable licence,
Do the low-rated English play at dice,
What is this castle call'd that stands hard by?
turkey-cocks. God pless you, Aunchient Pistol! you
Never did faithful subject more rejoice
shall we not? what sayest thou, my fair
your leek? there is not enough leek to swear by.
Her sceptre so fantastically borne
good leg will fall, a straight back will stoop, a
So did he turn and over Suffolk's neck
We'll chide this Dauphin at his father's door.
time shall serve, there shall be smiles, but that
not who knew it
Possess them not with fear, take from them now
Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws
To venge me as I may and to put forth
Madam my interpreter, what says she?
As fear may teach us out of late examples
Alencon, and an enemy to our person, if thou
Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth
Flourish
I am a king that find thee, and I know
Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland.
'Le chien est retourne a son propre vomissement, et
Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.
Look back into your mighty ancestors:
We must bear all. O hard condition,
hollow: but a good heart, Kate, is the sun and the
And give it to this fellow. Keep it, fellow,
followers, whose condemnation is pronounced. So far
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all,
So perhaps did yours.
She hath good leave.
And make imaginary puissance,
And, as a branch and member of this royalty,
serviteur, excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon
Ha! art thou bedlam? dost thou thirst, base Trojan,
To sounds confused, behold the threaden sails,
Let pry through the portage of the head
Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty people
To mark the full-fraught man and best indued
we shall never see the end of it. Who goes there?
Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms
believe your majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek
Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
these days. The king has killed his heart. Good
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
As yet the lamentation of the French
Dear nurse of arts and joyful births,
And when the mind is quicken'd, out of doubt,
No, I am a Welshman.
Who servest thou under?
'Gainst him whose wrong gives edge unto the swords
Let us condole the knight, for, lambkins we will live.
For all the temporal lands which men devout
Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
And use it for my haste. Come, come, away!
The air, a charter'd libertine, is still,
My liege, this was my glove, here is the fellow of
They draw
Or void the field, they do offend our sight:
leur noces, il n'est pas la coutume de France.
Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem:
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land
Say, if my father render fair return,
I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends, and
Me a groat!
Which is both healthful and good husbandry:
And then I would no other company.
Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of France?
Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, march away:
To re-survey them, we will suddenly
If we are mark'd to die, we are enow
for her favours, I could lay on like a butcher and
universal world, or in France, or in England!
ACT I
conscience, la!
They say he cried out of sack.
And a true lover of the holy church.
need not to be ashamed of your majesty, praised be
terms, as I may: and that's the humour of it.
Seek through your camp to find you.
Of Charles the Great. Also King Lewis the Tenth,
Enter the Constable of France, the LORD RAMBURES, ORLEANS, DAUPHIN, with others
Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale.
Wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter,
to come to the mines, for, look you, the mines is
Linger your patience on, and we'll digest
That what you speak is in your conscience wash'd
Imploring pardon.
Invites the King of England's stay at home,
Back to our brother England.
shook your back.
They of those marches, gracious sovereign,
With men of courage and with means defendant,
Enter GRANDPRE
enough in his belly. Hold, there is twelve pence
Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips,
And we must yearn therefore.
is very well, what he has spoke to me, that is well,
Did claim some certain dukedoms, in the right
Setting endeavour in continual motion,
By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle
I hope they will not come upon us now.
retire, and the Duke of Exeter is master of the
And his kinsman too.
And bid thy ceremony give thee cure!
Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,
Commend my service to me sovereign.'
himself aggrieved at this glove, that is all, but I
Il me commande de vous dire que vous faites vous
Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.
out of my prains what is the name of the other
The Constable of France.
My liege!
Though France himself and such another neighbour
Opens his vasty jaws, and on your head
serve you to mend your shoes: come, wherefore should
What are thy rents? what are thy comings in?
King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,
impieties for the which they are now visited. Every
Though it appear a little out of fashion,
Ruling in large and ample empery
What a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of
Flourish. Enter the FRENCH KING, the DAUPHIN, the DUKES of BERRI and BRETAGNE, the Constable, and others
Which oft our stage hath shown, and, for their sake,
France being ours, we'll bend it to our awe,
Ay, I praise God, and I have merited some love at
A drench for sur-rein'd jades, their barley-broth,
To fill King Edward's fame with prisoner kings
I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string
His subjects to oppression and contempt
These English monsters! My Lord of Cambridge here,
Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers,
I tell thee, constable, my mistress wears his own hair.
subject's duty is the king's, but every subject's
Enter PISTOL
Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing,
When we have march'd our rackets to these balls,
Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais.
Unto the crown of France. That you may know
and untempering effect of my visage. Now, beshrew
Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one!
is the moral of it, that she is turning, and
Exeunt
Exit
God's will! I pray thee, wish not one man more.
And, touched with choler, hot as gunpowder,
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Convey'd himself as heir to the Lady Lingare,
Exit
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm
Idly supposed the founder of this law,
Why, all our ranks are broke.
And justly and religiously unfold
What see you in those papers that you lose
Well placed: there stands your friend for the
To swearing and stern looks, diffused attire
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dolphin,
Enter the Boy
With crowns imperial, crowns and coronets,
Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,
Up, princes! and, with spirit of honour edged
Working so grossly in a natural cause,
That never may ill office, or fell jealousy,
He hath not told his thought to the king?
The patterns that by God and by French fathers
Exeunt. Alarum, and chambers go off
was full of jests, and gipes, and knaveries, and
addition in French, Notre trescher fils Henri, Roi
Les doigts? ma foi, j'oublie les doigts, mais je me
Enter Chorus
Toward Calais: grant him there, there seen,
With some suspicion. I will weep for thee,
Enter a Messenger
The Dauphin, whom of succors we entreated,
He that shall live this day, and see old age,
Why, so didst thou: come they of noble family?
Then did they imitate that which I composed to my
Almost no better than so many French,
quotidian tertian, that it is most lamentable to
fall to: if you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.
Urged by the commons? Doth his majesty
Alas, she hath from France too long been chased,
With envy of each other's happiness,
That bloodily did spawn upon his face,
To-night in Harfleur we will be your guest,
That caves and womby vaultages of France
Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.
The sciences that should become our country,
fire-shovel: I knew by that piece of service the
gentlewoman about me, and I know, Kate, you will to
l'avez promis, il est content de vous donner la
Let us be worried and our nation lose
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
will be a black matter for the king that led them to
affirm it.
It follows then the cat must stay at home:
Touching our person seek we no revenge,
your straight strossers.
It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe,
an thou wilt not, why, then, be enemies with me too.
The singing masons building roofs of gold,
nor pibble pabble in Pompey's camp, I warrant you,
Give the word through.
Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confused
Duke Alencon's.
Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours:
defeated the law and outrun native punishment,
between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations,
I'll live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me,
Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crown'd King
Well, then, that's the humour of't.
Therefore, I say 'tis meet we all go forth
For I have made an offer to his majesty,
For God doth know how many now in health
Then go we in, to know his embassy,
Now, my lord constable!
Exit
prove a good soldier-breeder: shall not thou and I,
Without more help, could fight this royal battle!
Kate, the elder I wax, the better I shall appear:
That England shall couch down in fear and yield.
He sends you this most memorable line,
which he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me,
So tell your master.
shoe trod upon God's ground and his earth, in my
Seems to prepare his way: so let him land,
sir John!' quoth I	'what, man! be o' good
Prithee, put up.
A thousand pounds by the year: thus runs the bill.
I think it be.
gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux cents ecus.
the fat knight with the great belly-doublet: he
Crouch for employment. But pardon, and gentles all,
And thereupon give me your daughter.
what is thy name? discuss.
French upbraided or abused in disdainful language,
Of France and England, did this king succeed,
Any thing in or out of our demands,
mastiffs in robustious and rough coming on, leaving
I did never know so full a voice issue from so
Know'st thou Fluellen?
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost,
But this lies all within the will of God,
Come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town,
I am the most offending soul alive.
Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid's kind,
This becomes the great.
The borrow'd glories that by gift of heaven,
You say very true, scauld knave, when God's will is:
All hell shall stir for this.
maintain his argument as well as any military man in
full ripe: now we speak upon our cue, and our voice
Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up
He seems indifferent,
What is't to me, when you yourselves are cause,
I will the banner from a trumpet take,
Let us not hang like roping icicles
The sin upon my head, dread sovereign!
I myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.
for you, and I pray you to serve Got, and keep you
Will cut their passage through the force of France,
before they are married, would she say?
That make such waste in brief mortality.
Whose tenors and particular effects
As send precepts to the leviathan
But thither would I hie.
The 'solus' in thy teeth, and in thy throat,
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his majesty,
a' bade me lay more clothes on his feet: I put my
And I repent my fault more than my death,
Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns,
a good silling, I warrant you, or I will change it.
Turn him to any cause of policy,
having any occasion to write for matter of grant,
Familiar as his garter: that, when he speaks,
contented as in the king's company, his cause being
Enter EXETER, BEDFORD, and WESTMORELAND
your French heart, I will be glad to hear you
there was but one way, for his nose was as sharp as
The organs, though defunct and dead before,
Join'd with an enemy proclaim'd and from his coffers
Have in these parts from morn till even fought
Never was such a sudden scholar made,
What feats he did that day: then shall our names.
though his affections are higher mounted than ours,
Excellent, madame!
Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse:
God, so long as your majesty is an honest man.
Why, so didst thou: seem they grave and learned?
Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteep'd,
For our losses, his exchequer is too poor, for the
That we may wander o'er this bloody field
thine, Ireland is thine, France is thine, and Harry
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.
O bon Dieu! les langues des hommes sont pleines de
From this day to the ending of the world,
heal your pate.
The day, my friends and all things stay for me.
Suppose the ambassador from the French comes back,
But I will rise there with so full a glory
estimation in the world, but did see him do as
These cull'd and choice-drawn cavaliers to France?
Attest in little place a million,
deserved praise on my palfrey: it is a theme as
And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.
Would men observingly distil it out.
For your great seats now quit you of great shames.
Boy, bristle thy courage up, for Falstaff he is dead,
As manhood shall compound: push home.
That, face to face and royal eye to eye,
I was told that  by one that knows him better than
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,
Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,
The figo for thee, then!
By the white hand of my lady, he's a gallant prince.
Reproach and everlasting shame
come, shall we about it?
but his lackey: 'tis a hooded valour, and when it
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
Where Charles the Great, having subdued the Saxons,
And giddy Fortune's furious fickle wheel,
tres-puissant seigneur.
No, Kate? I will tell thee in French, which I am
With casted slough and fresh legerity.
The French ambassador upon that instant
Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow
I will peat his pate four days. Bite, I pray you, it
Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep mouth'd sea,
And sheathe for lack of sport: let us but blow on them,
perjury, some, making the wars their bulwark, that
empty a heart: but the saying is true 'The empty
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!
And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
himself in Thames up to the neck, and so I would he
talk of horse and armour?
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha' done
tongues, and my horse is argument for them all:
May cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction
him with any appearance of fear, lest he, by showing
That all the courts of France will be disturb'd
Exit
I know not if the day be ours or no,
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of
Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,
My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that,
No, by my troth, not long, for we cannot lodge and
And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
That can be with a nimble galliard won,
O, let us yet be merciful.
'Tis wonderful!
Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil.
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.
Que dit-il? que je suis semblable a les anges?
How did this offer seem received, my lord?
Go with my brothers to my lords of England:
Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third,
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Re-enter the FRENCH KING and his QUEEN, BURGUNDY, and other Lords
By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great
Before thy most assured overthrow:
My purpose should not fail with me,
the luggage of our camp: the French might have a
pret, car ce soldat ici est dispose tout a cette
SCENE I. London. An ante-chamber in the KING'S palace.
Oui. Sauf votre honneur, en verite, vous prononcez
Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms
all my fame for a pot of ale and safety.
Never was monarch better fear'd and loved
Il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense.
The greater therefore should our courage be.
SCENE III. The same. Before the gates.
That haunted us in our familiar paths:
Our scions, put in wild and savage stock,
I think he will eat all he kills.
To him and to his heirs, namely, the crown
Putting it straight in expedition.
Enter Corporal NYM and Lieutenant BARDOLPH
Health and fair time of day, joy and good wishes
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,
Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
And teach them how to war. And you, good yeoman,
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
Enough, captain: you have astonished him.
are matched with as few good deeds, for a' never
and I sall quit you with gud leve, as I may pick
Each battle sees the other's umber'd face,
Of this good day and of this gracious meeting,
In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.
To view the sick and feeble parts of France:
Hath turn'd his balls to gun-stones, and his soul
fights not. For Pistol, he hath a killing tongue
They'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears,
Exeunt
Ingrateful, savage and inhuman creature!
committed at the bridge.
The brightest heaven of invention,
No, to the spital go,
Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back.
I know him not.
I Richard's body have interred anew,
Be warned by me, then: they that ride so and ride
By this leek, I will most horribly revenge: I eat
For yet a many of your horsemen peer
town is beseeched, and the trumpet call us to the
A hundred almshouses right well supplied,
Therefore exhale.
Exeunt
handkerchers: which makes much against my manhood,
And therefore, living hence, did give ourself
merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the
down together, I plucked this glove from his helm:
others how they should prepare.
The mayor and all his brethren in best sort,
Well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire:
eat like wolves and fight like devils.
Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in
The winter coming on and sickness growing
Than from it issued forced drops of blood:
Qui va la?
Fortune is Bardolph's foe, and frowns on him,
Or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat
Haply a woman's voice may do some good,
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
were, and I by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.
As self-neglecting.
To-morrow for the march are we addrest.
O ceremony, show me but thy worth!
O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend
When Cressy battle fatally was struck,
But that our honours must not. What's to say?
Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.
The glove which I have given him for a favour
Which I have open'd to his grace at large,
In cases of defence 'tis best to weigh
This day is called the feast of Crispian:
occasion, that sall I, marry.
Your highness bade me ask for it to-day.
To kiss.
My lord, I'll tell you, that self bill is urged,
He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand,
Henry Lord Scroop of Masham.
Is not their climate foggy, raw and dull,
none to guard it but boys.
And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for
By my faith, sir, but it is, never any body saw it
This will I also wear in my cap: if ever thou come
fellow of this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth
We are in God's hand, brother, not in theirs.
Good old knight,
Breasting the lofty surge: O, do but think
the dawning as we do.
He threw his wounded arm and kiss'd his lips,
Till I do challenge it. Give him the crowns:
Hugh Capet also, who usurped the crown
It is.
I did present him with the Paris balls.
Then you are a better than the king.
You cannot revel into dukedoms there.
We are enow yet living in the field
Do all expect that you should rouse yourself,
And in their pale dull mouths the gimmal bit
Returns us that his powers are yet not ready
Enter Chorus
With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass
It yearns me not if men my garments wear,
Encore qu'il est contre son jurement de pardonner
A' said once, the devil would have him about women.
outlive that day to see His greatness and to teach
To envelop and contain celestial spirits.
red-faced, by the means whereof a' faces it out, but
SCENE I. The English camp at Agincourt.
A friend.
thou shalt find the best king of good fellows.
Borne with the invisible and creeping wind,
And that we are most lofty runaways.
His eyes are humbler than they used to be.
Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. But, O,
With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur:
For husbands, fathers and betrothed lovers,
thee with scambling, and thou must therefore needs
Left by the fatal and neglected English
And, with a feeble gripe, says 'Dear my lord,
SCENE IV. France. The KING'S palace.
'Fore God, his grace is bold, to trust these traitors.
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
Save ceremony, save general ceremony?
How yet resolves the governor of the town?
De nails, madame.
That they lack, for if their heads had any
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it:
tongue, and I thine, most truly-falsely, must needs
his weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him
may call beasts.
Killing them twice. O, give us leave, great king,
Most worthy brother England, fairly met:
Tell him, I'll knock his leek about his pate
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.
As in this king.
if any man challenge this, he is a friend to
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy,
Will stand a tip-toe when the day is named,
out of prawls, and prabbles' and quarrels, and
Do botch and bungle up damnation
done, at such and such a sconce, at such a breach,
PROLOGUE
And hold-fast is the only dog, my duck:
What do you call him?
valiant a man as Mark Antony, and he is a man of no
Sir, know you this glove?
And for achievement offer us his ransom.
not according to the disciplines of the war: the
Why, so didst thou: or are they spare in diet,
The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
Be like a king and show my sail of greatness
Your majesty shall mock at me, I cannot speak your England.
The sum of all our answer is but this:
Upon that I kiss your hand, and I call you my queen.
our princess English?
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a
On one part and on the other? Take it, God,
But he that temper'd thee bade thee stand up,
hour is an honourable badge of the service, and I do
gone off, look you, and there is gallant and most
that's all the riches I got in his service.
there's an end.
Lie drown'd and soak'd in mercenary blood,
O Seigneur Dieu, je m'en oublie! de elbow. Comment
heard that men of few words are the best men, and
But taken and impounded as a stray
Within the fore-rank of our articles.
So soon did lose his seat and all at once
Charles Duke of Orleans, nephew to the king,
From glistering semblances of piety,
Enter the KING
prave man.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter PISTOL, French Soldier, and Boy
that is the breff and the long. Marry, I wad full
Willing to overlook this pedigree:
Marry, he told me so himself, and he said he cared
Although I did admit it as a motive
England, to mope with his fat-brained followers so
He prays you to save his life: he is a gentleman of
Our king is not like him in that: he never killed
Exeunt CAMBRIDGE, SCROOP and GREY, guarded
This knight, no less for bounty bound to us
Why, the enemy is loud, you hear him all night.
cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, Kate, as I have a
hereafter, I pray you, mock at 'em, that is all.
My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,
O, how hast thou with 'jealousy infected
We would have all such offenders so cut off: and we
Now thrive the armourers, and honour's thought
'Twas I, indeed, thou promised'st to strike,
Soldier, why wearest thou that glove in thy cap?
See you, my princes, and my noble peers,
The freckled cowslip, burnet and green clover,
true English, I love thee, Kate: by which honour I
He'll drop his heart into the sink of fear
Embark his royalty, and his brave fleet
A friend.
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
you.
my king and master, so much my office.
Flourish. Exeunt
Then with Scotland first begin:'
The armourers, accomplishing the knights,
You must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy,
I do not know you so good a man as myself: so
But, till the king come forth, and not till then,
Whose state so many had the managing,
And all my mother came into mine eyes
Girding with grievous siege castles and towns,
If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.
By faith and honour,
courser, for my horse is my mistress.
Draws
The offer likes not: and the nimble gunner
Behold, as may unworthiness define,
a finer end and went away an it had been any
the crime of it out of us.
O England! model to thy inward greatness,
his own head, the king is not to answer it.
Master Fer! I'll fer him, and firk him, and ferret
baisant la main d'une de votre seigeurie indigne
SCENE II. The same.
though they can outstrip men, they have no wings to
It is not well done, mark you now take the tales out
Charles Delabreth, high constable of France,
hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst, and thou
That I may prompt them: and of such as have,
upon Saint Tavy's day.
great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will
God's will and his pleasure, captain, I beseech you
France et vous etes mienne. It is as easy for me,
him from the pridge.
There.
De foot, madame, et de coun.
after! come, 'tis a foolish saying.
I shall have my noble?
I'll assure you, a' uttered as brave words at the
lousy, pragging knave, Pistol, which you and
o' th' ear: or if I can see my glove in his cap,
very gallantly maintained the pridge: the French is
But thou, 'gainst all proportion, didst bring in
By Chrish, la! tish ill done: the work ish give
pridge: I can tell your majesty, the duke is a
My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk,
mocks, I have forgot his name.
Bring in to any of your ancestors.
Ay, so please your majesty. The Duke of Exeter has
business of the master the author of the servant's
flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor
In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
Your majestee ave fausse French enough to deceive de
His jest will savour but of shallow wit,
is imperial: England shall repent his folly, see
To this imperial throne. There is no bar
But, my good lord,
You patience to endure, and true repentance
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
He never did harm, that I heard of.
rapier, as I may, in fair terms: if you would walk
But though we think it so, it is no matter:
Will raise your highness such a mighty sum
And make you long become it!
I will none of your money.
From open haunts and popularity.
And will with all expedience charge on us.
You are their heir, you sit upon their throne,
And tell thy king I do not seek him now,
That grows not in a fair consent with ours,
turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a
rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary
Than they in fearing.
Here was a royal fellowship of death!
les mots aussi droit que les natifs d'Angleterre.
Que dit-il, monsieur?
your heart: but, good Kate, mock me mercifully, the
country, there be nothing compelled from the
Go therefore, tell thy master here I am,
Yet, God before, tell him we will come on,
But all's not done, yet keep the French the field.
And whipp'd the offending Adam out of him,
likeness, he must appear naked and blind. Can you
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald:
boy, half French, half English, that shall go to
Upon our fields.
Oui, vraiment, sauf votre grace, ainsi dit-il.
Ay, leeks is good: hold you, there is a groat to
My most redoubted father,
Exeunt all but KING HENRY
And your great-uncle's, Edward the Black Prince,
French crowns, and to-morrow the king himself will
I and my bosom must debate awhile,
And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,
And gallop o'er the field.
Within this wooden O the very casques
For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,
Very good.
The kindred of him hath been flesh'd upon us,
Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness
fifteen hundred paces of your tents.
To smother up the English in our throngs,
To bar your highness claiming from the female,
subjection.
blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained:
Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds,
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
And all our princes captiv'd by the hand
Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?
his true likeness.
Would I were able to load him with his desert! Will
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea,
But lay down our proportions to defend
Exit
And let him say to England that we send
make a circle, if conjure up love in her in his true
Not so, my liege: this lodging likes me better,
That beats upon the high shore of this world,
Straining upon the start. The game's afoot:
Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege,
Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.
And let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut
I was not angry since I came to France
the humour of it is too hot, that is the very
prave passages, marry, th' athversary was have
Yet leave our cousin Katharine here with us:
my nation? Who talks of my nation?
In liberty of bloody hand shall range
You know your places: God be with you all!
swashers. I am boy to them all three: but all they
And what have kings, that privates have not too,
But, like a lackey, from the rise to set
Shall yield them little, tell the constable.
Mine was not bridled.
remembered of it, the Welshmen did good service in a
So please you.
tromperies.
Besides, they are our outward consciences,
To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot
Shall not be wink'd at, how shall we stretch our eye
Tut! I have the best armour of the world. Would it were day!
Which to reduce into our former favour
look you, is both alike. There is a river in
And of it left his son imperial lord.
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Deliver up the crown, and to take mercy
Sennet. Exeunt
Than is your majesty: there's not, I think, a subject
Our madams mock at us, and plainly say
That may with reasonable swiftness add
'orld, I warrant you sall find, in the comparisons
Good.
Enter a Messenger
element shows to him as it doth to me, all his
O seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est perdu!
Alencon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy,
The gates of mercy shall be all shut up,
More feathers to our wings, for, God before,
parler. Comment appelez-vous la main en Anglois?
Thus comes the English with full power upon us,
For that I have laid by my majesty
Je ne doute point d'apprendre, par la grace de Dieu,
ensemble: de hand, de fingres, de nails, de arm, de
Without impeachment: for, to say the sooth,
Hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit
As waters to the sucking of a gulf.
coxcomb? in your own conscience, now?
mines? have the pioneers given o'er?
I will cut thy throat, one time or other, in fair
to my mistress.
For hear her but exampled by herself:
Go, go, you are a counterfeit cowardly knave. Will
Exeunt
concavities of it is not sufficient, for, look you,
Covering discretion with a coat of folly,
I saw him fumble with the sheets and play with
I shall do't, my lord.
but his nose is executed and his fire's out.
Of time, of numbers and due course of things,
devil: have at the very eye of that proverb with 'A
coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that we should also,
Enter KING HENRY, BEDFORD, and GLOUCESTER
aucun prisonnier, neanmoins, pour les ecus que vous
And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his
places: for these fellows of infinite tongue, that
you shall find the ceremonies of the wars, and the
laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man, and
The flat unraised spirits that have dared
fought a most prave pattle here in France.
you like me, Kate?
Who hath measured the ground?
I warrant it is to knight you, captain.
An oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate.
it, and he that I gave it to in change promised to
Though 'tis no wisdom to confess so much
Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide,
If we, with thrice such powers left at home,
To England will I steal, and there I'll steal:
But freshly looks and over-bears attaint
The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!
love it, nor your affections and your appetites and
Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.
Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham,
Die and be damn'd! and figo for thy friendship!
I will speak lower.
The native mightiness and fate of him.
pardonner! Je suis gentilhomme de bonne maison:
I will, my liege.
The king is set from London, and the scene
And flashing fire will follow.
The constable desires thee thou wilt mind
villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the
Let him be punish'd, sovereign, lest example
Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.
That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness
The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks,
PROLOGUE
Or rather swaying more upon our part
Your greeting is from him, not from the king.
A parley sounded
ale-washed wits, is wonderful to be thought on. But
Be patient, for you shall remain with us.
With treacherous crowns, and three corrupted men,
The leading of the vaward.
possession of the pridge, but he is enforced to
Our gracious brother, I will go with them:
And say 'These wounds I had on Crispin's day.'
Nor this I have not, brother, so denied,
la truie lavee au bourbier,' thou makest use of any thing.
In your fair minds let this acceptance take.
Eight thousand and four hundred, of the which,
The dead men's blood, the pining maidens groans,
't as valourously as I may, that sall I suerly do,
Harry le Roy.
Hear him but reason in divinity,
Bardolph, if your majesty know the man: his face is
They call it Agincourt.
the arbitrement of swords, can try it out with all
Though war nor no known quarrel were in question,
Be soon collected and all things thought upon
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege.
Give me thy glove, soldier: look, here is the
war, and in the derivation of my birth, and in
For thou art framed of the firm truth of valour.
SCENE II. Southampton. A council-chamber.
And generally to the crown and seat of France
predeceased valour and dare not avouch in your deeds
and where they would be safe, they perish: then if
I cannot tell.
Than ever at one time the clergy yet
There is an aunchient lieutenant there at the
wait on her: so the maid that stood in the way for
Dishonour not your mothers, now attest
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story,
And time hath worn us into slovenry:
Unto our brother France, and to our sister,
When I do rouse me in my throne of France:
if there is any martial law in the world.
That in the field lie slain: of princes, in this number,
pridge, I think in my very conscience he is as
Must lie and fester.
I'll be before thee.
Chrish save me, la! in an hour: O, tish ill done,
He longs to eat the English.
The darnel, hemlock and rank fumitory
To our most fair and princely cousin Katharine,
Confirm'd conspiracy with fearful France,
You called me yesterday mountain-squire, but I will
A good old commander and a most kind gentleman: I
Tucket. Enter MONTJOY
There is no answer made.
And dout them with superfluous courage, ha!
you shall be a woodmonger, and buy nothing of me but
Although my body pay the price of it.
broken coxcomb. When you take occasions to see leeks
And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,
And on to-morrow, bid them march away.
But, hark! what new alarum is this same?
Captain Jamy is a marvellous falourous gentleman,
And bless us with her former qualities.
Who twice a-day their wither'd hands hold up
Base is the slave that pays.
teach her to know my meaning: for maids, well
We'll give them present audience. Go, and bring them.
Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear'd cur of Iceland!
By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the king:
Knocks go and come, God's vassals drop and die,
Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry
To bring your most imperial majesties
And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,
a pen, and a' babbled of green fields. 'How now,
Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler
my suit. Give me your answer, i' faith, do: and so
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood
Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would give
sleep, and they may have their throats about them at
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon, his
bald, a fair face will wither, a full eye will wax
Or else what follows?
Though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as
To the mines! tell you the duke, it is not so good
Now are we well resolved, and, by God's help,
Saying our grace is only in our heels,
Good argument, I hope, we will not fly--
She is our capital demand, comprised
Do we all holy rites,
Think we King Harry strong,
If any order might be thought upon.
That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin's scorn.
Alarum. Enter KING HENRY, and forces, WARWICK, GLOUCESTER, EXETER, and others
Now, lords, for France, the enterprise whereof
conscience, now, is it not?
is a little variations.
heart, and my duty, and my life, and my living, and
Chrish save me, I will cut off your head.
And as our vineyards, fallows, meads and hedges,
the guilt of premeditated and contrived murder,
lute-case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold it for
Your grace doo's me as great honours as can be
What's he that wishes so?
her dispraise those parts in me that you love with
Upon these words I came and cheer'd him up:
The enemy more mighty than he seems:
Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse,
A good soft pillow for that good white head
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both,
And crowns for convoy put into his purse:
A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills
May't please your majesty to give us leave
O God of battles! steel my soldiers' hearts,
creatures, their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage.
Here is the man.
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.
Daughter to Charles the foresaid duke of Lorraine:
And make a moral of the devil himself.
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits
correction, there is not many of your nation--
Your fresh-fair virgins and your flowering infants.
As are our wretches fetter'd in our prisons:
Yes, verily and in truth, you shall take it, or I
to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So
But that his wildness, mortified in him,
And their most reverend heads dash'd to the walls,
Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!
For I do know Fluellen valiant
And that's but unwholesome food they say.
Open your gates. Come, uncle Exeter,
But every rub is smoothed on our way.
Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous,
my blindness, who cannot see many a fair French city
Old I do wax, and from my weary limbs
My name is Pistol call'd.
gallant service.
wife about her husband's neck, hardly to be shook
Enter Chorus
I said so, dear Katharine, and I must not blush to
The emperor's coming in behalf of France,
Who in unnecessary action swarm
you, of the Roman disciplines, than is a puppy-dog.
Exeunt
My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg
Dieu de batailles! where have they this mettle?
Such as will enter at a lady's ear
Enter Chorus
of any thing he sees there, let thine eye be thy
Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Bretagne,
cannot tell.
Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton,
But if it be a sin to covet honour,
He is simply the most active gentleman of France.
Piercing the night's dull ear, and from the tents
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day.
If hell and treason hold their promises,
Strikes him
Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master, and
Printing their proud hoofs i' the receiving earth,
fain be about the ears of the English.
a beard of the general's cut and a horrid suit of
and this they con perfectly in the phrase of war,
Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,
all, if there is not better directions.
In every branch truly demonstrative,
such a place,' some swearing, some crying for a
'Wonder of nature,'--
For my part, I care not: I say little, but when
crown. I know no ways to mince it in love, but
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers,
And let not hemp his wind-pipe suffocate:
If wishes would prevail with me,
Quiet thy cudgel, thou dost see I eat.
Question your grace the late ambassadors,
With such a heady currance, scouring faults
Art thou his friend?
No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England:
et en peu de temps.
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
beseech your highness, pardon me.
They shall be apprehended by and by.
Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to
If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace,
And the third hour of drowsy morning name.
be granted to be much at one. But, Kate, dost thou
Dat is as it sall please de roi mon pere.
Will it never be morning?
Ill-favouredly become the morning field:
Ill will never said well.
before would not abide looking on.
breaks yonder?
Whiles his most mighty father on a hill
What says she, fair one? that the tongues of men
Herald shews him another paper
Sooner than quittance of desert and merit
all, Katharine, break thy mind to me in broken
Sauf votre honneur, me understand vell.
When down the hill he holds his fierce career?
valorous, and thrice-worthy signieur of England.
And follows so the ever-running year,
They are then excused, my lord, when they see not
Captain Macmorris, I beseech you now, will you
That task our thoughts, concerning us and France.
As I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Let senses rule, the word is 'Pitch and Pay:'
native garb, he could not therefore handle an
which rolls, and rolls, and rolls: in good truth,
Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee!
And by their hands this grace of kings must die,
christom child, a' parted even just between twelve
ales and his cups, so also Harry Monmouth, being in
Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat,
And on his more advice we pardon him.
Yes, my conscience, he did us great good.
Was like, and had indeed against us pass'd,
Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem,
Aunchient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.
In drops of crimson blood.
To know what willing ransom he will give.
O peace, Prince Dauphin!
For certainly thou art so near the gulf,
his majesty.
Only he hath not yet subscribed this:
Beyond the river Sala, in the year
ACT II
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.
horse with any that treads but on four pasterns.
the world, in the disciplines of the pristine wars
now, come apace to the king: there is more good
meant, Captain Macmorris, peradventure I shall think
My rightful hand in a well-hallow'd cause.
No, my good knight,
desire you to eat it.
Giving full trophy, signal and ostent
Unpruned dies, her hedges even-pleach'd,
That our French gallants shall to-day draw out,
encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou dost me love.
Following the mirror of all Christian kings,
Enter MACMORRIS and Captain JAMY
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Think when we talk of horses, that you see them
tell him my mind.
'Tis positive 'gainst all exceptions, lords,
Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow:
The king himself is rode to view their battle.
Go, clear thy c rystals. Yoke-fellows in arms,
Our debts, our careful wives,
But this, which they produce from Pharamond,
To barbarous licence, as 'tis ever common
shot, who disgraced, what terms the enemy stood on,
Our puissance into the hand of God,
And may our oaths well kept and prosperous be!
Collect them all together at my tent:
Enlarge the man committed yesterday,
I am a gentleman of a company.
Pluck their hearts from them. Not to-day, O Lord,
latter end and she must be blind too.
Speak, captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.
To make divorce of their incorporate league,
With the plebeians swarming at their heels,
Thy spirits are most tall.
I do confess my fault,
A damned death!
'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon
Welsh plood out of your pody, I can tell you that:
Enter Constable
Les dames et demoiselles pour etre baisees devant
You know me by my habit.
And therefore we must needs admit the means
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers?
How smooth and even they do bear themselves!
Egregious ransom.
Tell us the Dauphin's mind.
Yon island carrions, desperate of their bones,
Neanmoins, je reciterai une autre fois ma lecon
Richard Earl of Cambridge.
For so appears this fleet majestical,
To new-store France with bastard warriors.
O Kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. Dear
If that the soldier strike him, as I judge
That admiration did not whoop at them:
signify to you that Fortune is blind, and she is
O, je vous supplie, pour l'amour de Dieu, me
Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage,
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
the poet makes a most excellent description of it:
Your majesty came not like yourself: you appeared to
when you come into your closet, you'll question this
The French are bravely in their battles set,
Alexander killed his friend Cleitus, being in his
where I could not breed no contention with him, but
Ay, that a' did.
Subdued the Saxons, and did seat the French
That you divest yourself, and lay apart
That's a lie in thy throat. I charge you in his
There must we bring him, and myself have play'd
with me last night, who, if alive and ever dare to
most sage demoiselle dat is en France.
fluent as the sea: turn the sands into eloquent
To be the realm of France, and Pharamond
According to their firm proposed natures.
Honour is cudgelled. Well, bawd I'll turn,
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him,
Well, 'tis not so, my lord high constable,
The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,
John Duke of Alencon, Anthony Duke of Brabant,
The devil take order now! I'll to the throng:
If little faults, proceeding on distemper,
O brave spirit!
ear withal, but I will tell thee aloud 'England is
And let another half stand laughing by,
knowledge of his directions: by Cheshu, he will
And all the peers', for surety of our leagues.
So get you hence in peace, and tell the Dauphin
Yet that is but a crush'd necessity,
hand into the bed and felt them, and they were as
weight to re-answer, his pettiness would bow under.
I thought upon one pair of English legs
what they do.
measure in strength. If I could win a lady at
Mort de ma vie! if they march along
Plant neighbourhood and Christian-like accord
The abuse of distance, force a play:
shall name your highness in this form and with this
Admit me Chorus to this history,
Good God! why should they mock poor fellows thus?
What drink'st thou oft, instead of homage sweet,
Alarum. Enter KING HENRY, EXETER, BEDFORD, GLOUCESTER, and Soldiers, with scaling-ladders
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
Shall I attend your grace?
appears, it will bate.
Is the Duke of Exeter safe?
a man. For Bardolph, he is white-livered and
And their executors, the knavish crows,
You'll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?
My brother Gloucester's voice? Ay,
De chin.
Gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger,
A fearful battle render'd you in music:
I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn. I
And lie pavilion'd in the fields of France.
Took stand for idle speculation:
That play'st so subtly with a king's repose,
would this be, if he durst steal any thing
With mistful eyes, or they will issue too.
all things: I will tell you, asse my friend,
de son mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels:
One, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and the second,
that, making God so free an offer, He let him
Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tell vat is 'like me.'
be a clipper.
Enter FLUELLEN and GOWER
summered and warm kept, are like flies at
There left behind and settled certain French,
behold. Sweet men, come to him.
The sun doth gild our armour, up, my lords!
Are every one a woe, a sore complaint
Exeunt Ambassadors
take the word of a king and a bachelor. How answer
And yet my sky shall not want.
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand,
Whose hours the peasant best advantages.
call you the town's name where Alexander the Pig was born!
You see this chase is hotly follow'd, friends.
Enter FLUELLEN
And, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth!
trot as well, were some of your brags dismounted.
Of what your reverence shall incite us to.
Conceives by idleness and nothing teems
Since then my office hath so far prevail'd
majesty is take out of the helmet of Alencon.
and a bastard, and a knave, and a rascal. What ish
Of parents good, of fist most valiant.
Break up their drowsy grave and newly move,
The king is a good king: but it must be as it may,
God be wi' you, princes all, I'll to my charge:
your victuals: come, there is sauce for it.
None else of name, and of all other men
you do not use me with that affability as in
Follow and see there be no harm between them.
between Saint Denis and Saint George, compound a
look you, be an ass and a fool and a prating
blame her then, being a maid yet rosed over with the
Which cannot in their huge and proper life
And make them skirr away, as swift as stones
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
Exeunt
He says his name is Master Fer.
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
With opening titles miscreate, whose right
In life so lifeless as it shows itself.
Let floods o'erswell, and fiends for food howl on!
Had twenty years been made. This is a stem
thou couldst, thou wouldst find me such a plain king
Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully: but
Till in her ashes she lie buried.
It fits us then to be as provident
Enter ERPINGHAM
Enter FLUELLEN and GOWER
Is in the very May-morn of his youth,
Base tike, call'st thou me host? Now, by this hand,
His present and your pains we thank you for:
And rather choose to hide them in a net
But one ten thousand of those men in England
For there is none of you so mean and base,
be thought we keep a bawdy house straight.
am: the violet smells to him as it doth to me: the
Monmouth: it is called Wye at Monmouth, but it is
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.
That the fixed sentinels almost receive
Who hath sent thee now?
Do crave admittance to your majesty.
Touch her soft mouth, and march.
So happy be the issue, brother England,
And you shall find his vanities forespent
We will, in France, by God's grace, play a set
You are the better at proverbs, by how much 'A
My duty to you both, on equal love,
In aid whereof we of the spiritualty
Your grandfather of famous memory, an't please your
and a quiet sword, by the means whereof a' breaks
May it be possible, that foreign hire
Guarded with grandsires, babies and old women,
Then I would he were here alone, so should he be
Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
Hath got the voice in hell for excellence:
And overlook their grafters?
took you for, I made no offence, therefore, I
Or shall we sparingly show you far off
They have a king and officers of sorts,
You know how apt our love was to accord
My lord constable, the armour that I saw in your tent
Or if I might buffet for my love, or bound my horse
certain of it, and when I cannot live any longer, I
French part of such a boy, and for my English moiety
And after fight with them?
De nick. Et le menton?
Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards!
But God be thanked for prevention,
Strikes him
I know him to be valiant.
I wear it for a memorable honour,
would fain see it once, an please God of his grace
did: I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I
Enter PISTOL, Hostess, NYM, BARDOLPH, and Boy
Stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp
black beard will turn white, a curled pate will grow
but in the figures and comparisons of it: as
Fair Katharine, and most fair,
Enter YORK
Gets him to rest, cramm'd with distressful bread,
you, la plus belle Katharine du monde, mon tres cher
him, Kate.
Where is the king?
Rien puis? L'air et la feu.
Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe,
Come, your answer in broken music, for thy voice is
Princely in both.
You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate: there is
Go down upon him, you have power enough,
Exit
And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy,
wear it in his cap: I promised to strike him, if he
You have good judgment in horsemanship.
Then shall we find to-morrow they have only stomachs
mines, the Duke of Gloucester would speak with you.
So did you me, my liege.
Another fall of man. Their faults are open:
do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish
To the tent-royal of their emperor,
eyes, and then they will endure handling, which
No, with no more than if we heard that England
The well-appointed king at Hampton pier
It was ourself thou didst abuse.
And when you find him evenly derived
testimony and witness, and will avouchment, that
Where some, like magistrates, correct at home,
And be it death proclaimed through our host
We lose the better half of our possession:
Exit
Defile the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters,
Your majesty hear now, saving your majesty's
You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.
as partly touching or concerning the disciplines of
'Tis no matter for his swellings nor his
SCENE II. The same. The Presence chamber.
We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.
the athversary, you may discuss unto the duke, look
Saint Davy's day is past.
Jaques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,
What mightst thou do, that honour would thee do,
men would carry coals. They would have me as
You have enscheduled briefly in your hands.
Upon our spiritual convocation
And say 'To-morrow is Saint Crispian:'
Creating awe and fear in other men?
Do you not remember, a' saw a flea stick upon
So that the art and practic part of life
John. Ah, poor heart! he is so shaked of a burning
That men are merriest when they are from home.
His bleeding sword 'twixt England and fair France.
Be copy now to men of grosser blood,
and in him that escapes, it were not sin to think
who know it, I will confess it to all the 'orld: I
Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
Enter the DAUPHIN, ORLEANS, RAMBURES, and others
A! that's a foul fault.
This day shall gentle his condition:
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars.
The Dauphin's meaning and our embassy?
Since God so graciously hath brought to light
To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur,
make you to-day a squire of low degree. I pray you,
Doing the execution and the act
Hark you, the king is coming, and I must speak with
More sharper than your swords, hie to the field:
Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires
That is he: I'll tell you there is good men porn at Monmouth.
And eke out our performance with your mind.
God pless your majesty!
For us, we will consider of this further:
We carry not a heart with us from hence
Suits not in native colours with the truth,
By his blunt bearing he will keep his word,
Lives he, good uncle? thrice within this hour
Je te prie, m'enseignez: il faut que j'apprenne a
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous ceremony,
At the discovery of most dangerous treason
one, they will beat us, for they bear them on their
There is one goat for you.
How he comes o'er us with our wilder days,
SCENE V. The same.
May haply purchase him a box o' th' ear,
Since I may say 'Now lie I like a king.'
Who, busied in his majesty, surveys
To have me fold up Parca's fatal web?
saving faith within me tells me thou shalt, I get
Where is the number of our English dead?
heure de couper votre gorge.
The venom of such looks, we fairly hope,
Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
The royal captain of this ruin'd band
Prevented from a damned enterprise:
Re-enter Hostess
Suffolk first died: and York, all haggled over,
Where that his lords desire him to have borne
And of women.
be so, good Corporal Nym.
And make her chronicle as rich with praise
king, and the dukes: it is no time to discourse. The
For this revolt of thine, methinks, is like
souviendrai. Les doigts? je pense qu'ils sont
Kate, my wooing is fit for thy understanding: I am
Familiar in his mouth as household words
Exeunt
But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs,
He gives you, upon his knees, a thousand thanks, and
Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat
Seem frosty? O, for honour of our land,
Therefore, Caveto be thy counsellor.
That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French
In answer of which claim, the prince our master
Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?
The taste whereof, God of his mercy give
To steal his sweet and honey'd sentences,
Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
All other devils that suggest by treasons
husband, come home presently.
How now, Captain Fluellen! come you from the bridge?
It sorts well with your fierceness.
Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of beef.
The Governor and some Citizens on the walls, the English forces below. Enter KING HENRY and his train
Tells Harry that the king doth offer him
I had as lief have my mistress a jade.
Sit patiently and inly ruminate
his grace, and his majesty too!
Go with the princes, or stay here with us?
Even to the utmost grain: that you shall read
And quickly will return an injury:
Alice, tu as ete en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage.
he esteems himself happy that he hath fallen into
But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim,
Hence! I am qualmish at the smell of leek.
For we have now no thought in us but France,
Making defeat on the full power of France,
English condition. Fare ye well.
Look to my chattels and my movables:
you, throw none away, the skin is good for your
As we his subjects have in wonder found,
smooth, so that, having neither the voice nor the
plain-song of it.
You show great mercy, if you give him life,
And, be assured, you'll find a difference,
Put forth disorder'd twigs, her fallow leas
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.
By this sword, he that makes the first thrust, I'll
N'avez vous pas deja oublie ce que je vous ai enseigne?
So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt,
Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself.
But fear the main intendment of the Scot,
To view the field in safety and dispose
have before gored the gentle bosom of peace with
Exeunt all but Boy
How well supplied with noble counsellors,
understand thus much English, canst thou love me?
think the duke hath lost never a man, but one that
O braggart vile and damned furious wight!
Well met, Corporal Nym.
Exit
An please your majesty, let his neck answer for it,
over, the trompet sound the retreat. By my hand, I
Galling the gleaned land with hot assays,
bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline.
To which is fixed, as an aim or butt,
intellectual armour, they could never wear such heavy
Which if they have as I will leave 'em them,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remember'd.
You have conspired against our royal person,
De hand. Et les doigts?
Which is his only.
You are assembled: and my speech entreats
The interim, by remembering you 'tis past.
Toward heaven, to pardon blood, and I have built
Shall Kate be my wife?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Your reproof is something too round: I should be
Then imitate the action of the tiger,
As is the ooze and bottom of the sea
How now! what means this, herald? know'st thou not
far out of his knowledge!
Do not run away.
For he hath stolen a pax, and hanged must a' be:
many irreconciled iniquities, you may call the
for one fair French maid that stands in my way.
if alive, I will strike it out soundly.
And I:
a good house, and for his ransom he will give you
De elbow.
Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire:
effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom too
And not a man of them that we shall take
The Duke of York commends him to your majesty.
Then, joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,
Exit
incarnate.
entrails were hairs, le cheval volant, the Pegasus,
Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel
That did affright the air at Agincourt?
For pax of little price.
And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French:
Le Roy! a Cornish name: art thou of Cornish crew?
That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and
For he is footed in this land already.
The name of hardiness and policy.
nor never break for urging. If thou canst love a
Then I will kiss your lips, Kate.
Perish the man whose mind is backward now!
take me by the hand, and say 'Harry of England I am
Southampton.
Constantinople and take the Turk by the beard?
To appoint some of your council presently
farther than to say 'do you in faith?' I wear out
Go bid thy master well advise himself:
Who are the late commissioners?
Four hundred twenty-six, and Charles the Great
What men have you lost, Fluellen?
Was re-united to the crown of France.
d'Angleterre, Heritier de France, and thus in
For the Dauphin,
Do my good morrow to them, and anon
Leaving his body as a paradise,
Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? I'll ask
'If that you will France win,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts
From helmet to the spur all blood he was.
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
We are blessed in the change.
Who, like a foul and ugly witch, doth limp
Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
Much good do you, scauld knave, heartily. Nay, pray
ish nothing done, so Chrish sa' me, la!
If that same demon that hath gull'd thee thus
No, nor it is not meet he should. For, though I
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,
Mangle the work of nature and deface
Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag,
speak it to you, I think the king is but a man, as I
As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
Five hundred were but yesterday dubb'd knights:
That every wretch, pining and pale before,
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more,
Lord, no, yet I love thee too. And while thou
Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,
The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of
confess it brokenly with your English tongue. Do
Not yet, my cousin: we would be resolved,
Sing still for Richard's soul. More will I do,
Exeunt
If they will fight with us, bid them come down,
Or, guilty in defence, be thus destroy'd?
Pass our accept and peremptory answer.
pray you, what thinks he of our estate?
And gave me up to tears.
Or should, or should not, bar us in our claim:
Your majesty entendre bettre que moi.
Marry, if you would put me to verses or to dance for
Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?
I blame you not,
Keep thy word: fare thee well.
knives to cut one another's throats?
Which I beseech your highness to forgive,
The Lord Grandpre.
We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy,
The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand
That God fought for us.
He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities
He is a craven and a villain else, an't please your
It is so: and you may, some of you, thank love for
The slave, a member of the country's peace,
Than amply to imbar their crooked titles
Were now the general of our gracious empress,
And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts:
This star of England: Fortune made his sword,
For we no longer are defensible.
Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy,
look you, of my mind, as touching the direction of
And sworn unto the practises of France,
do yours, for upholding the nice fashion of your
Well have we done, thrice valiant countrymen:
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
With good acceptance of his majesty,
So the proportions of defence are fill'd,
With blood and sword and fire to win your right,
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here,
Beseeching God and you to pardon me.
upward, and all was as cold as any stone.
Suppose within the girdle of these walls
We'll not offend one stomach with our play.
The king hath run bad humours on the knight, that's
familiar with men's pockets as their gloves or their
faint a number, and for our disgrace, his own
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
ACT III
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
The king hath granted every article:
Me well, which is the prescript praise and
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots
How you awake our sleeping sword of war:
By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves
What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?
Come, go we in procession to the village.
Did to his predecessors part withal.
Where--O for pity!--we shall much disgrace
In bloody field,
Upon Saint Davy's day.
your digestions doo's not agree with it, I would
Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries
Exeunt
lest he knock that about yours.
And, princes French, and peers, health to you all!
So hath your highness, never king of England
This would drink deep.
Why then, rejoice therefore.
Kill the poys and the luggage! 'tis expressly
His companies unletter'd, rude and shallow,
And God acquit them of their practises!
France, Kate: but, in loving me, you should love
SCENE IV. The FRENCH KING's palace.
And gentlemen in England now a-bed
Some of them will fall to-morrow, I hope.
Montjoy.
Macedon, and there is also moreover a river at
Disorder, that hath spoil'd us, friend us now!
De foot et de coun! O Seigneur Dieu! ce sont mots
too, and ambiguities.
Ciel, cousin Orleans.
I swear, I scorn the term, Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers.
The French have reinforced their scatter'd men:
Saw his heroical seed, and smiled to see him,
at: for if, look you, he were my brother, I would
I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at betting?
That fear attends her not.
and, for mine own part, I have not a case of lives:
Sir John Falstaff.
So! in the name of Jesu Christ, speak lower. It is
The 'solus' in thy most mervailous face,
Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question
The hum of either army stilly sounds,
The tucket sonance and the note to mount,
have another leek in my pocket, which you shall eat.
Why, now thou hast unwish'd five thousand men,
swear, and my father's soul, the work ish ill done,
That wrought upon thee so preposterously
Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.
Not working with the eye without the ear,
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggar'd host
And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
and therefore tell me, most fair Katharine, will you
where he is.
SCENE III. The English camp.
when he got me: therefore was I created with a
As bird doth sing on bough.
What is thy soul of adoration?
fain hear some question 'tween you tway.
There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in
wink and hold out mine iron: it is a simple one, but
In the quick forge and working-house of thought,
Your naked infants spitted upon pikes,
With one appearing hair, that will not follow
That the land Salique is in Germany,
Let there be sung 'Non nobis' and 'Te Deum,'
Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald,
'In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant:'
corporal, be patient here. How now, mine host Pistol!
No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.
The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon,
therefore I must cast it up.
As never did the clergy at one time
d'Anglois vitement. Comment appelez-vous les ongles?
shoulders: but it is no English treason to cut
quite from the answer of his degree.
Yield, cur!
love me for this, take me: if not, to say to thee
I will desire you to live in the mean time, and eat
Shall we call in the ambassador, my liege?
Under Captain Gower, my liege.
Or like to men proud of destruction
That rail'd against our person: we consider
Oui, vraiment.
NYM and PISTOL draw
hand, de fingres, et de nails.
With half their forces the full Pride of France
Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
And all wide-stretched honours that pertain
'Tis no sinister nor no awkward claim,
God and his angels guard your sacred throne
News have I, that my Nell is dead i' the spital
have me? Put off your maiden blushes, avouch the
shines bright and never changes, but keeps his
What rein can hold licentious wickedness
Right joyous are we to behold your face,
desire the duke to use his good pleasure, and put
Here a' comes, and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with him.
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
To buy a slobbery and a dirty farm
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale
Enter, at one door KING HENRY, EXETER, BEDFORD,  GLOUCESTER, WARWICK, WESTMORELAND, and other Lords,  at another, the FRENCH KING, QUEEN ISABEL, the  PRINCESS KATHARINE, ALICE and other Ladies, the DUKE of BURGUNDY, and his train
Crowned with faith and constant loyalty.
their villany goes against my weak stomach, and
To whom I do appeal, and in whose name
Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,
I saw him down, thrice up again and fighting,
and a man that I love and honour with my soul, and my
father was called Philip of Macedon, as I take it.
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England
Give me thy hand.
they feared the death, they have borne life away,
off, I would prick your guts a little, in good
O that we now had here
'Sblood! an arrant traitor as any is in the
Of hot and forcing violation?
Our children and our sins lay on the king!
Re-enter Lords, with EXETER and train
Enter KING HENRY and EXETER
Neighbour'd by fruit of baser quality:
Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.
Against the Scot, who will make road upon us
She hath herself not only well defended
Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife: good
'Tis certain there's not a boy left alive, and the
verify as much in his beard: be has no more
Though we seemed dead, we did but sleep: advantage
Let me speak proudly: tell the constable
As one man more, methinks, would share from me
Yes, captain, but with this acknowledgement,
Whose high upreared and abutting fronts
And gentlemen of blood and quality.
Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,
And take with you free power to ratify,
As pure as sin with baptism.
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.
But Exeter hath given the doom of death
I cannot tell: things must be as they may: men may
March to the bridge, it now draws toward night:
Why that the naked, poor and mangled Peace,
Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,
That owe yourselves, your lives and services
mains d'un chevalier, je pense, le plus brave,
Exeunt all except HENRY, KATHARINE, and ALICE
Non, je reciterai a vous promptement: de hand, de
find, I warrant you, that there is no tiddle toddle
Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick:
Yes.
pillage and robbery. Now, if these men have
Beaumont, Grandpre, Roussi, and Fauconberg,
Who with a body fill'd and vacant mind
Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,
sooner persuade Harry of England than a general
We shall, my liege.
Of their dead bodies!
And thou hast given me most bitter terms.
I will fetch him.
The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,
God-den to your worship, good Captain James.
is to him advantage, or not dying, the time was
Small time, but in that small most greatly lived
if I should take from another's pocket to put into
elder-gun, that a poor and private displeasure can
To line and new repair our towns of war
O Seigneur Dieu!
Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the
Your fathers taken by the silver beards,
As duly, but not as truly,
The Dauphin longs for morning.
O diable!
Enter Ambassadors of France
Out of appearance?
the hands of one, as he thinks, the most brave,
Alas, your too much love and care of me
your sake, Kate, why you undid me: for the one, I
How now! what's the matter?
No more, cousin.
O hound of Crete, think'st thou my spouse to get?
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
turned into a maid, for they are all girdled with
three, though they would serve me, could not be man
must leave them, and seek some better service:
some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of
I do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.
To sort our nobles from our common men.
But if the cause be not good, the king himself hath
True: those that were your father's enemies
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
After the taste of much correction.
Et le coude?
Into a thousand parts divide on man,
only downright oaths, which I never use till urged,
Now, welcome, Kate: and bear me witness all,
Others, like merchants, venture trade abroad,
We hope to make the sender blush at it.
But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state,
him: discuss the same in French unto him.
Stars, my lord.
knave it is: I hope your majesty is pear me
he be perjured, see you now, his reputation is as
The fatal balls of murdering basilisks:
France,--I cannot tell vat is baiser en Anglish.
All out of work and cold for action!
A night is but small breath and little pause
shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and better:
terms: that is the humour of it.
sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men's lives saved.
French quarrels enow, if you could tell how to reckon.
I should fight withal, if he be alive.
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
And of buxom valour, hath, by cruel fate,
For oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafer-cakes,
Fret fetlock deep in gore and with wild rage
Exeunt. Flourish
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
Swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.
that I shall die, is true, but for thy love, by the
day is hot, and the weather, and the wars, and the
Sits mocking in our plumes. O merchante fortune!
Of heady murder, spoil and villany.
I pray thee, bear my former answer back:
We would not die in that man's company
Charles Delabreth, high constable of France,
Be merciful, great duke, to men of mould.
have neither words nor measure, and for the other, I
your own fault and not mine: for had you been as I
his right wits and his good judgments, turned away
Who died within the year of our redemption
Therefore doth heaven divide
Alarum
his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes
it ish give over: I would have blowed up the town, so
Shall witness live in brass of this day's work:
kill him, by this sword, I will.
That shall be swallow'd in this controversy.
No, great king:
Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish
But your request shall make me let it pass.
believe, as cold a night as 'tis, he could wish
Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
We doubt not of a fair and lucky war,
Send for him, good uncle.
And then to Calais, and to England then:
There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries,
Exit
As matching to his youth and vanity,
Which in the eleventh year of the last king's reign
SCENE I. France. Before Harfleur.
The brother of the Duke of Burgundy,
I tell thee truly, herald,
majesty's name, apprehend him: he's a friend of the
est meilleur que l'Anglois lequel je parle.
By your patience, Aunchient Pistol. Fortune is
Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour
to eat and none to fight. Now is it time to arm:
Abate thy rage, great duke!
If I begin the battery once again,
I say, I will make him eat some part of my leek, or
Trail'st thou the puissant pike?
We may as bootless spend our vain command
The sad-eyed justice, with his surly hum,
Though Cambridge, Scroop and Grey, in their dear care
Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
will do as I may: that is my rest, that is the
Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give:
Sweats in the eye of Phoebus and all night
Be here presented. Now we bear the king
What is thy name? I know thy quality.
SCENE VIII. Before KING HENRY'S pavilion.
Arrest them to the answer of the law,
And every thing that seems unnatural.
Unto the camp, and profits will accrue.
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,
the spirit of love in her, that he will appear in
Either past or not arrived to pith and puissance,
Re-enter SALISBURY
foul with me, Pistol, I will scour you with my
vous avez le possession de moi,--let me see, what
SCENE VI. Another part of the field.
Cry 'God for Harry, England, and Saint George!'
have been as good as my word.
The breath no sooner left his father's body,
And calls them brothers, friends and countrymen.
Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.
The man that once did sell the lion's skin
Come, shall I make you two friends? We must to
If I owe you any thing, I will pay you in cudgels:
If I live to see it, I will never trust his word after.
From him, and thus he greets your majesty.
Yes, that a' did, and said they were devils
My Lord of Warwick, here is--praised be God for it!
Before we hear him, of some things of weight
enough, if we know we are the kings subjects: if
flower-de-luce?
Though we upon this mountain's basis by
cheer.' So a' cried out 'God, God, God!' three or
The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder:
Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not
Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspired,
And what art thou, thou idle ceremony?
knowledge in th' aunchient wars, upon my particular
day! Alas, poor Harry of England! he longs not for
children rawly left. I am afeard there are few die
Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,
What treasure, uncle?
arms and heads, chopped off in battle, shall join
Which you before so urged, lies in his answer.
Before him through the city: he forbids it,
Usurp'd from you and your progenitors.
siege is given, is altogether directed by an
I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur
Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
'Tis likely,
Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed,
From sincere motions, by intelligence,
My bounties upon you.
You must be godfather, and answer for her.
Exeunt
Hate him perniciously, and, o' my conscience,
Of our most sovereign king.
In all my miseries, but thou hast forced me,
I would be all, against the worst may happen.
You come to take your stand here, and behold
My good lords, hitherto, in all the progress
And take it from a heart that wishes towards you
By darkening my clear sun. My lord, farewell.
Where, being but a private man again,
And, if you may confess it, say withal,
A giant traitor!
Pertaining thereunto, as fights and fireworks,
Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are
My learn'd and well-beloved servant, Cranmer,
And with the same full state paced back again
Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows,
I writ to's holiness. Nay then, farewell!
Touch me alike, they're breath I not believe in.
Of all their loyalties: wherein, although,
The duke is coming: see the barge be ready,
To the last penny, 'tis the king's: my robe,
Heaven forgive me!
Which you are running here.
At his return
Possession of a subject.
A gracious king that pardons all offences
Yea, with a splitting power, and made to tremble
In mind and feature: I persuade me, from her
Is this exaction?
To ruminate on this so far, until
I'll show your grace the strangest sight--
And when old time shall lead him to his end,
And I.
Which was a sin, yet in bestowing, madam,
This morning come before us, where, I know,
Mine and your master, with his own hand gave me,
I do profess
I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham
And process of this time, you can report,
Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy,
Nay, Sir Nicholas,
That you have many enemies, that know not
To second all his plot. I do assure you
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
Whilst our commission from Rome is read,
He attends your highness' pleasure.
Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately,
Divers and dangerous, which are heresies,
Which time shall bring to ripeness: she shall be--
Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em
To love her for her mother's sake, that loved him,
Invited by your noble self, hath sent
Well said, Lord Sands,
Be of good cheer,
Will bring me off again. What's this? 'To the Pope!'
They'll say 'tis naught: others, to hear the city
Spoke by a holy monk, 'that oft,' says he,
The offer of this time, I cannot promise
My sovereign, I confess your royal graces,
What you commanded me, but by her woman
Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat
Take thy lute, wench: my soul grows sad with troubles,
Hath show'd him gold, my life is spann'd already:
Giving it to KATHARINE
My chaplain to no creature living, but
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford
And generally, whoever the king favours,
Become a churchman better than ambition:
The most convenient place that I can think of
Beseech you, sir, to spare me, till I may
Meanwhile must be an earnest motion
And keep it from the earth.
They have done my poor house grace, for which I pay 'em
Out of his grace he adds.
I shall be with you presently, good master puppy.
Appear in forms more horrid,--yet my duty,
I hope I have: I am able now, methinks,
And Duke of Buckingham, now, poor Edward Bohun:
Sir Thomas,
To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure
With your theme, I could
We write in water. May it please your highness
'Tis all my business. At our last encounter,
What was the speech among the Londoners
Let me have time and counsel for my cause:
That I advise your shunning.
He is return'd in his opinions, which
the dove, crowned with an earl's coronet.
The first and happiest hearers of the town,
To quench mine honour: they would shame to make me
Between us and the emperor, the queen's great nephew,
Daring the event to the teeth, are all in uproar,
Most dread liege,
I was then present, saw them salute on horseback,
Admit him entrance, Griffith: but this fellow
No friend, no hope, no kindred weep for me,
A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys
I meant to rectify my conscience,--which
My lord, my lord, you are a sectary,
Every thing that heard him play,
The times and titles now are alter'd strangely
They shall no more prevail than we give way to.
Lovell!
For me?
Be now produced and heard.
Or died where they were made, or shortly after
Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
It doth appear, for, upon these taxations,
The reformation of our travell'd gallants,
As I have made ye one, lords, one remain,
staves, and strong ones: these are but switches to
Either of king or council, when you went
Pray, tell 'em thus much from me:
Their very noses had been counsellors
All the land knows that:
His grace
Ay, ay, my liege,
There's nothing I have done yet, o' my conscience,
Enter DENNY
This is too much,
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
Than Marchioness of Pembroke: to which title
The last fit of my greatness,--good your graces,
With all their honourable point of ignorance
Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left
You are a churchman, or, I'll tell you, cardinal,
These cardinals trifle with me: I abhor
In all this noble bevy, has brought with her
Come, you and I must walk a turn together,
Pray their graces
I served my king, he would not in mine age
I do not know
Made to the queen, to call back her appeal
This talking lord can lay upon my credit,
Exit Chamberlain, attended. All rise, and tables removed
More worthy this place than myself, to whom,
Most throughly to be winnow'd, where my chaff
Fail not to use, and with what vehemency
What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?
To stop the rumor, and allay those tongues
But this cannot continue.
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.
Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive,
Men into such strange mysteries?
Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, the purse borne before him,  certain of the Guard, and two Secretaries with  papers. CARDINAL WOLSEY in his passage fixeth his  eye on BUCKINGHAM, and BUCKINGHAM on him, both full of disdain
In the old time of war, would shake the press,
He's honest, on mine honour. God's blest mother!
And well deserving? yet I know her for
As I will lend you cause, my doing well
Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.
Your grace?
They that bear
A good digestion to you all: and once more
Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
For any suit of pounds, and you, O fate!
The duke being at the Rose, within the parish
Because all those things you have done of late,
And prove it too, against mine honour aught,
About the giving back the great seal to us,
There cannot be those numberless offences
Which ye shall never have while I live.
Please your highness, note
But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear ye:
The profit of the state. For your great graces
After 'the duke his father,' with 'the knife,'
May be beholding to a subject, I
But little for my profit: can you think, lords,
It can do me no damage,' adding further,
Or be a known friend, 'gainst his highness' pleasure,
Thank you, good lord archbishop:
The king's request that I would visit you,
I hope I am not too late, and yet the gentleman,
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
Power as he was a counsellor to try him,
How your state stands i' the world, with the whole world?
If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
When I first moved you.
You ask with such a violence, the king,
Cornets. Enter KING HENRY VIII, leaning on  CARDINAL WOLSEY's shoulder, the Nobles, and LOVELL,  CARDINAL WOLSEY places himself under KING HENRY VIII's feet on his right side
Not sound, I say.
A queen, and daughter to a king, inter me.
I'll save you
Found his deserts: how innocent I was
Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,
This many summers in a sea of glory,
And heartily, for our deliverance,
By my soul,
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
A thousand pound a year, annual support,
For so run the conditions, leave those remnants
For ever and for ever shall be yours.
Of lords and ladies, having brought the queen
In them a wilder nature than the business
Or has given all before, and he begins
shall have two noble partners with you, the old
How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly
Lord Abergavenny, to whom by oath he menaced
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles
Are you not stronger than you were?
This butcher's cur is venom-mouth'd, and I
And live a subject? Nay, forsooth, my friends,
To the king I'll say't, and make my vouch as strong
To pray for her? what, is she crying out?
If I command him, follows my appointment:
Hath into monstrous habits put the graces
Call her again.
Without, my noble lords?
And so his peers, upon this evidence,
Prithee, let's walk. Now, by my holidame.
Nay, my lord,
Bearing the king's will from his mouth expressly?
Sir,
For eminent assistants, but, spider-like,
Enter QUEEN KATHARINE and her Women, as at work
Most willing, madam.
O, God's will! much better
God shall be truly known, and those about her
Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and
With thy religious truth and modesty,
I humbly thank his grace, and from these shoulders,
It hath struck.
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.
Of every realm, that did debate this business,
You shall not be my judge: for it is you
Good angels keep it from us!
Or touch of her good person?
And to what end is this? Nay, ladies, fear not,
Not long before your highness sped to France,
My conscience first received a tenderness,
Things to strike honour sad. Bid him recount
We are but men, and what so many may do,
You writ to the pope against the king: your goodness,
My lord. Griffith, farewell. Nay, Patience,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
In tempting of your patience, but am bolden'd
By that you love the dearest in this world,
The gentleman is learn'd, and a most rare speaker,
As doth a rock against the chiding flood,
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
I sent your message, who return'd her thanks
Dare bite the best. I do beseech your lordships,
Fall into the compass of a praemunire,
Have left me naked to mine enemies.
Duchess of Norfolk, and Lady Marquess Dorset: will
God bless him!
Both of my life and office, I have labour'd,
Of the whole state: as, of late days, our neighbours,
In the next chamber.
Rich stuffs, and ornaments of household, which
Are not words duly hallow'd, nor my wishes
Is there no other way of mercy,
I am much too venturous
The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix,
With thee and all thy best parts bound together,
For so we are inform'd, with new opinions,
How got they in, and be hang'd?
The due o' the verdict with it: at what ease
You were ever good at sudden commendations,
Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her:
Made Britain India: every man that stood
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief
God turn their hearts! I never sought their malice--
She must, the saints must have her, yet a virgin,
Your colt's tooth is not cast yet.
before him.
You turn the good we offer into envy.
O, God save ye!
What warlike voice,
I will not tarry, no, nor ever more
Talk us to silence.
How you stand minded in the weighty difference
thousand, here will be father, godfather, and all together.
To make great haste. All fast? what means this? Ho!
That you would love yourself, and in that love
Re-enter DENNY, with CRANMER
This is against our pleasure.
Of me more must be heard of, say, I taught thee,
[Aside]	To betray me.--
Who waits there? Sure, you know me?
Now, I pray God, amen!
As you have done my truth. If he know
I must not yet forsake you: let's be merry:
Envy and crooked malice nourishment
By virtue of that ring, I take my cause
Alas, has banish'd me his bed already,
And break the foresaid peace. Let the king know,
About his neck, yet never lost her lustre,
They have all new legs, and lame ones: one would take it,
Good time, and live: but for the stock, Sir Thomas,
To waste these times. Good hour of night, Sir Thomas!
My sword i' the life-blood of thee else. My lords,
Into a general prophecy, That this tempest,
Exeunt
Beshrew me, I would,
To think an English courtier may be wise,
Sir, I have brought my lord the archbishop,
Strikes his breast hard, and anon he casts
Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
The fairest hand I ever touch'd! O beauty,
More than my all is nothing: nor my prayers
We come not by the way of accusation,
How far you satisfied me.
In our own natures frail, and capable
My Lord Sands.
favour to you,
Of bringing back the prisoner.
To a most noble judge, the king my master.
The estate of my poor queen. Leave me alone,
By the Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,
Clapp'd wings to me.
6. Marquess Dorset, bearing a sceptre of gold,
The other moiety, ere you ask, is given,
Ay, marry,
'If,' quoth he, 'I for this had been committed,
We now present. Those that can pity, here
To make your house our Tower: you a brother of us,
Pray God he be not angry.
To make that only true we now intend,
There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends,
I am solicited, not by a few,
Alas, good lady!
Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me,
It will help me nothing
Our merchants' goods at Bourdeaux.
To taint that honour every good tongue blesses,
Under their blessed wings!
This compell'd fortune!--have your mouth fill'd up
And range with humble livers in content,
And lose by over-running. Know you not,
By violent swiftness, that which we run at,
and hit that woman, who cried out 'Clubs!' when I
May I be bold to ask at what that contains,
In honour honesty, the tract of every thing
At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,
Very well, my liege.
Sir, I desire you do me right and justice,
He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
The very thought of this fair company
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
Beyond you, to your friends.
What sudden anger's this? how have I reap'd it?
Charles, good night.
Trumpets
Farewell! a long farewell, to all my greatness!
Like a bright exhalation m the evening,
the tribulation of Tower-hill, or the limbs of
A woman of less place might ask by law:
They will'd me say so, madam.
As 'twere in love's particular, be more
But yet I cannot help you.
But how to make ye suddenly an answer,
From foreign princes.
May here find truth too. Those that come to see
O'ertopping woman's power. Madam, you do me wrong:
richly adorned with pearl, crowned. On each
When returns Cranmer?
In any of their courts.
The heads of all thy brother cardinals,
I cannot tell
We are.
on his head a demi-coronal of gold. With
That, as my hand has open'd bounty to you,
Sir,
None, madam.
Would for Carnarvonshire, although there long'd
I would 'twere something that would fret the string,
I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colbrand,
O, 'tis true:
And, when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
Peep through each part of him: whence has he that,
Which, to say sooth, are blessings, and which gifts,
One Gilbert Peck, his chancellor--
Good lady,
mouths, sir.'
Witness, how dear I hold this confirmation.
By this so sickened their estates, that never
I should be glad to hear such news as this
Nor, I'll assure you, better taken, sir.
Became the next day's master, till the last
And doctors learn'd: first I began in private
Being distress'd, was by that wretch betray'd,
I am sorry for't.
And dare us with his cap like larks.
May it please you noble madam, to withdraw
'Tis nobly spoken:
My mind gave me,
To the ground, and all the world shall mourn her.
One that, in all obedience, makes the church
Go, break among the press, and find a way out
How soon this mightiness meets misery:
Speak on, sir,
Men of his way should be most liberal,
Being of those virtues vacant. I fear nothing
Whose minister you are, whiles here he lived
Katharine our queen, before the primest creature
But from this lady may proceed a gem
Are to be fear'd. Have you a precedent
You'll part away disgraced.
For heaven now bids me, and the words I utter
A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us,
Who's that that bears the sceptre?
That through our intercession this revokement
Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel
Have misdemean'd yourself, and not a little,
More pangs and fears than wars or women have:
Let's in,
Exeunt with trumpets
To come near.
Heaven keep me from such counsel! 'Tis most true
The king's physician: as he pass'd along,
You're well met once again.
How holily he works in all his business!
Therefore, for goodness' sake, and as you are known
Ay, and the best she shall have, and my favour
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
If they shall fail, I, with mine enemies,
And thank the holy conclave for their loves:
By all the reverend fathers of the land
By my life,
Of my long weary life is come upon me. Farewell:
For goodness' sake, consider what you do,
a knight's daughter,
Re-enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, with GARDINER
My king is tangled in affection to
His love, too long ago! I am old, my lords,
No other obligation! By my life,
Is pleased you shall to the Tower, till you know
The king's attorney on the contrary
It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend,
Sir,
This is the cardinal's doing, the king-cardinal:
They are, as all my other comforts, far hence
Nay, good troth.
Our content
Our necessary actions, in the fear
This oracle of comfort has so pleased me,
They must either,
Yes, he was.
The princess dowager? how goes her business?
You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking
In faith, for little England
Should without issue die, he'll carry it so
I will have none so near else. Learn this, brother,
This world had air'd them: hence I took a thought,
From these sad thoughts, that work too much upon him:
Now, if you can blush and cry 'guilty,' cardinal,
Sleep in their graves.
EPILOGUE
First, that, without the king's assent or knowledge,
A noble troop of strangers,
They are a sweet society of fair ones.
Where this is question'd send our letters, with
I fear, with dancing is a little heated.
Aside
Nor shall not, while I have a stump.
Here.
I am about to weep, but, thinking that
To nature none more bound, his training such,
That bear a weighty and a serious brow,
And kingly dignity, we are contented
Thank your majesty.
My Wolsey, see it furnish'd. O, my lord,
And, to add greater honours to his age
If what I now pronounce you have found true:
Killing care and grief of heart
And let your reason with your choler question
But, thus much, they are foul ones.
Will have his will, and she must fall.
Drum and trumpet, chambers discharged
It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces,
A creature of the queen's, Lady Anne Bullen.'
That gentle physic, given in time, had cured me,
That would not be a queen, that would she not,
They may, 'cum privilegio,' wear away
about him are under the line, they need no other
Without the king's will or the state's allowance,
To leave a thousand-fold more bitter than
If with the sap of reason you would quench,
SONG
Speak it here:
I be not found a talker.
He shall appear in proof.
But I must needs to the Tower, my lords?
The king has sent me otherwhere: besides,
Under your hands and seals: therefore, go on:
Which, as I take it, is a kind of puppy
As you would to your friend.
Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.
And unmatch'd wit and judgment: Ferdinand,
Not only good and wise, but most religious:
Gone slightly o'er low steps and now are mounted
And throw it from their soul, though perils did
Leave me awhile.
The quiet of my wounded conscience,
To hear me speak his good now?
To use our utmost  studies in your service.
And the strong course of my authority
Pray, sit between these ladies.
Out of himself?
The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purposed.
And princely care foreseeing those fell mischiefs
Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission
Refuse you for my judge, whom, yet once more,
I bear i' the state, and nature does require
And do as I have bid you.
I have this day received a traitor's judgment,
All the whole time
might see from far some forty truncheoners draw to
But to those men that sought him sweet as summer.
And to you all, good health.
Is this the honour they do one another?
The other, London.
Who first raised head against usurping Richard,
I will implore: if not, i' the name of God,
A load would sink a navy, too much honour:
I swear, 'tis better to be lowly born,
By the heels, and suddenly, and on your heads
I free you from't. You are not to be taught
And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.
The many to them longing, have put off
This is strange to me.
Well worth the seeing.
Made my name once more noble. Now his son,
In which I have commended to his goodness
I do beseech your grace, for charity,
Would you expect? you are strangely troublesome.
The king to attach Lord Montacute, and the bodies
Good lord chamberlain,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it,
Pray, give me favour, sir. This cunning cardinal
I have been begging sixteen years in court,
Hath married the fair lady.
Of these exactions, yet the king our master--
Attend him here this morning.
My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking,
And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness,
If there be faith in men, meant for his trial,
Exeunt
Alas, poor wenches, where are now your fortunes!
'Twas said they saw but one, and no discerner
On my soul, I'll speak but truth.
I'll venture one have-at-him.
Stay:
Giving him papers
And durst commend a secret to your ear
That, like a jewel, has hung twenty years
The duke retain'd him his. But on, what hence?
He counsels a divorce, a loss of her
When you are call'd, return. Now, the Lord help,
Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart:
All these accused him strongly, which he fain
KING HENRY VIII kisses the child
Be to the prejudice of her present state,
Pray God he do! he'll never know himself else.
Nay, let 'em be unmanly, yet are follow'd.
May, if they think it well, let fall a tear,
Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues,
I made no spare, sir.
These ruin'd pillars, out of pity, taken
In a long motley coat guarded with yellow,
Which ever has and ever shall be growing,
Go, give 'em welcome, you can speak the French tongue,
Be what they will, may stand forth face to face,
His overthrow heap'd happiness upon him,
At once and fully satisfied,--whether ever I
And with what zeal! for, now he has crack'd the league
How now!
Go to, I'll make ye know your times of business:
That will undo her: to confirm this too,
An aged princess, many days shall see her,
The king shall have my service: but my prayers
Exit CARDINAL WOLSEY
Exit procession, and then a great flourish of trumpets
A worthy friend. The king has made him master
Into what pitch he please.
Which God's dew quench! Therefore I say again,
That seeks dispatch by day.
The play may pass, if they be still and willing,
Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,
Will render you no remedy, this ring
Noble madam,
And for me,
So good a lady that no tongue could ever
the head, and three times was his nose discharged
Shall mark my grave. Commend me to his grace,
Under device and practise.
That I have been your wife, in this obedience,
The honey of his language. No, he's settled,
Till I find more than will or words to do it,
Men fear'd the French would prove perfidious,
You were now running o'er: you have scarce time
What will become of me now, wretched lady!
As able to perform't, his mind and place
We may as well push against Powle's, as stir em.
Exit SUFFOLK
O'ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
O, many
When I shal l dwell with worms, and my poor name
What is't for?
The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!
Tied it by letters-patents: now, who'll take it?
Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you,
His dews fall every where.
Saving your mincing, the capacity
Press not a falling man too far! 'tis virtue:
Enter, to Chamberlain, NORFOLK and SUFFOLK
By custom of the coronation.
To give her the avaunt! it is a pity
I am sorry
Wait in the presence.
I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds--
Have their free voices: Rome, the nurse of judgment,
Acquainted with this stranger 'tis as like you
The French king's sister: he shall marry her.
This tractable obedience is a slave
Newly preferr'd from the king's secretary,
He's discontented.
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions,
Where's his examination?
The business present: 'tis his highness' pleasure
'Tis well: the citizens,
What manner of man are you? My lord, I look'd
Flying for succor to his servant Banister,
By your power legatine, within this kingdom,
Enter Chamberlain, reading a letter
Wait else at door, a fellow-counsellor,
Then rose again and bow'd her to the people:
A woman lost among ye, laugh'd at, scorn'd?
In sweet music is such art,
A full-hot horse, who being allow'd his way,
You that thus far have come to pity me,
The king's eyes, that so long have slept upon
That swallow'd so much treasure, and like a glass
More out of malice than integrity,
To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on
Two women placed together makes cold weather:
Enter Chamberlain, SANDS, and LOVELL
Like it your grace,
Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.
Remembrance of my father-in-law, the duke,
He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker,
Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,
Being at Greenwich,
Infecting one another, yea, reciprocally--
Must bear the same proportion, and not ever
Stay, good my lords,
He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee:
Cause the musicians play me that sad note
The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who,
Alas, I am a woman, friendless, hopeless!
Yet, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce
If I but knew him, with my love and duty
We shall hear more anon.
A most arch heretic, a pestilence
SCENE I. London. An ante-chamber in the palace.
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
How now, my lord! you desire to know
Never greater,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,
The peace between the French and us not values
she was quartered. They fell on, I made good my
Be by my friends in Spain advised, whose counsel
Arrested him at York, and brought him forward,
Forthwith for what you come. Where's Gardiner?
The noble spirits to arms, they did perform
As you respect the common good, the state
His honour and the greatness of his name
Taxation!
Not for delights, times to repair our nature
No judge indifferent, nor no more assurance
Take heed, for heaven's sake, take heed, lest at once
That he would please to alter the king's course,
That cannot be: you are a counsellor,
Turn me away, and let the foul'st contempt
Why?
Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to,
Or wolf, or both,--for he is equal ravenous
You know I am a woman, lacking wit
As cherry is to cherry.
Saint Lawrence Poultney, did of me demand
Traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know
The trial just and noble. All the clerks,
How, sir?
You be convey'd to the Tower a prisoner,
Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again
Which I do well, for I am sure the emperor
And to be judged by him.
To oppose your cunning. You're meek and
Together with all famous colleges
For speaking false in that: thou art, alone,
That chair stand empty: but we all are men,
Matter against him that for ever mars
Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both
Deserve we no more reverence?
Sing, and disperse 'em, if thou canst: leave working.
For so they seem: they've left their barge and landed,
A still and quiet conscience. The king has cured me,
Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY and CROMWELL
He has my heart yet, and shall have my prayers
After my death I wish no other herald,
Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell,
Of thee, which says thus, 'Do my Lord of Canterbury
Thanks, my good lord chamberlain.
Sir, a Chartreux friar,
Sir, I did never win of you before.
Me, as his abject object: at this instant
I am thankful to you, and I'll go along
He dives into the king's soul, and there scatters
Madam, the same, your servant.
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
The force of this commission: pray, look to't,
Now in his ashes honour: peace be with him!
Trace the conjunction!
Nor shall not, when my fancy's on my play.
That fed him with his prophecies?
Of all these ears,--for where I am robb'd and bound,
Some spirit put this paper in the packet,
To the king's danger. Presently the duke
O my Lord Abergavenny, fare you well!
her succor, which were the hope o' the Strand, where
But little, Charles,
And consequence of dread, that I committed
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours:
There is indeed, which they would have your grace
SCENE I. A street in Westminster.
Language unmannerly, yea, such which breaks
Even of yourself, lord cardinal.
SCENE II. Before the council-chamber. Pursuivants, Pages,  and c.
Of this great sport together, as you guess?
Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours,
To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester's,
Is your displeasure with the king.
This night to be comptrollers.
A peace above all earthly dignities,
Pertains to the state, and front but in that file
SCENE II. An ante-chamber in the palace.
For he would needs be virtuous: that good fellow,
Then that, without the knowledge
The cardinal instantly will find employment,
My learn'd lord cardinal,
That had to him derived your anger, did I
Long in his highness' favour, and do justice
Call in more women. When I am dead, good wench,
There's more in't than fair visage. Bullen!
Whom after under the confession's seal
I fear he will indeed: well, let him have them:
Clap round fines for neglect: ye are lazy knaves,
Our reasons laid before him, hath commanded
Neglect him not, make use now, and provide
Not for that neither: here's the pang that pinches:
Many good nights, my lord: I rest your servant.
SCENE IV. A hall in Black-Friars.
'Tis sweet at first to acquire,--after this process,
Or springhalt reign'd among 'em.
And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes!
Will this work?
And every true heart weeps for't: all that dare
A very fresh-fish here--fie, fie, fie upon
The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter,
No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop
Melt and lament for her.
The region of my breast, which forced such way,
Cast her fair eyes to heaven and pray'd devoutly.
That come to hear a merry bawdy play,
Re-enter Servant
Yes, without all doubt.
The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous,
Arise, and take place by us: half your suit
Your pleasure be fulfill'd!
Why, all this business
Are grown so catching.
To those which would not know them, and yet must
This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius,
Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.
Never name to us, you have half our power:
Good master secretary,
To make a seemly answer to such persons.
To the sharp'st kind of justice. Please you sir,
To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me,
What news abroad?
From his ambitious finger. What had he
'My lord, the horses your lordship sent for, with
[Aside]  This is a piece of malice. I am glad
Ever beloved and loving may his rule be!
I fear, the story of his anger. 'Tis so,
The letter, as I live, with all the business
Kept him a foreign man still, which so grieved him,
With a true heart
Now, Lovell, from the queen what is the news?
To lighten all this isle? I'll to the king,
Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows,--
'Twould fall upon ourselves.
Not wake him in his slumber. A beggar's book
Why are we met in council?
Your highness with an heir!
3. Lord Chancellor, with the purse and mace
Into my private meditations?
For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
I humbly thank your highness,
Madam, we are here.
But that, till further trial in those charges
9. The old Duchess of Norfolk, in a coronal of
I have no further gone in this than by
To CARDINAL WOLSEY
That's paragon'd o' the world.
For so they phrase 'em--by their heralds challenged
You are so merciful: I see your end,
Exit CRANMER
These are the whole contents: and, good my lord,
Wherefore I sent for you.
Peep'd harms that menaced him: he privily
Exeunt
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
The king, your father, was reputed for
Out of the king's protection. This is my charge.
princess of England, Elizabeth!
That he ran mad and died.
Was cried incomparable, and the ensuing night
There ye shall meet about this weighty business.
I'll peck you o'er the pales else.
As he made semblance of his duty, would
Shall cry for blessings on him: may he live
One, certes, that promises no element
If the king blame me for't, I'll lay ye all
There's something more would out of thee, what say'st?
And point by point the treasons of his master
For 'tis to such a thing,--
Our cause, that she should lie i' the bosom of
Carried herself towards me.
They that must weigh out my afflictions,
Under pretence to see the queen his aunt--
Exit DENNY
I thank ye all. To you, my good lord mayor,
You may command us, sir.
My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave
That any Englishman dare give me counsel?
One that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure,
this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree
Which makes my whitest part black. The will of heaven
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow,
Farewell nobility, let his grace go forward,
And though he were unsatisfied in getting,
'Tis so:
Have I lived thus long--let me speak myself,
This to my lord the king.
They are harsh and heavy to me.
They love and dote on, call him bounteous Buckingham,
And that, without delay, their arguments
Have burnt that tongue than said so.
Would by a good discourser lose some life,
No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,
We have frighted with our trumpets, so, 'tis clear,
You'll leave your noise anon, ye rascals: do you
That made me happy at one stroke has taken
My comfort comes along. Break up the court:
Now present here together: that's to say,
Have too a woman's heart, which ever yet
O, fear him not,
And of a lovely boy: the God of heaven
Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,
Be what they will, I heartily forgive 'em:
I answer is most false. The duke by law
State-statues only.
Ye blew the fire that burns ye: now have at ye!
brazier by his face, for, o' my conscience, twenty
God safely quit her of her burthen, and
Hautboys. Enter KING HENRY VIII and others, as  masquers, habited like shepherds, ushered by the  Chamberlain. They pass directly before CARDINAL WOLSEY, and gracefully salute him
But reverence to your calling makes me modest.
Exeunt GARDINER and Page
After his patient's death: the king already
Mercy o' me, what a multitude are here!
My good lord archbishop, I'm very sorry
There make before them. Look, the good man weeps!
Come hither, Gardiner.
There had made a lasting spring.
And see the noble ruin'd man you speak of.
The fire that mounts the liquor til run o'er,
That never saw 'em pace before, the spavin
Of as great size. Ween you of better luck,
You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops.
Something mistaken in't.
The queen is obstinate,
Faith, and so it did.
My lords, I thank you both for your good wills,
This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy
More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue
But, pray, how pass'd it?
The king has gone beyond me: all my glories
To the cardinal's:
Your high profession spiritual: that again
I was my chamber's prisoner.
I'll turn to sparks of fire.
Cannot vouchsafe this burthen,'tis too weak
Have ever come too short of my desires,
Make me a curse like this.
Has he had knowledge of it?
conscience, this one christening will beget a
Deserves a corner: would all other women
Yes, my lord,
Into your private chamber, we shall give you
I have news to tell you: come, come, give me your hand.
these please you?
Never to hope again.
No, not a syllable:
So good, so noble and so true a master?
I know your back will bear a duchess: say,
Defacers of a public peace, than I do.
Noble lady,
All men's!
Who should attend on him? He makes up the file
[To NORFOLK and SUFFOLK]
What should this mean?
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
Full of sad thoughts and troubles.
I'm glad 'tis there: now I would pray our monsieurs
Whom from the flow of gall I name not but
On the complaint o' the tenants: take good heed
'Tis the right ring, by heaven: I told ye all,
Such doubts, as false coin, from it. The king loves you,
Beside that of the jewel house, is made master
I do not talk much.
That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey, Was dead?
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirr'd
Your hopes and friends are infinite.
This was a judgment on me, that my kingdom,
Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends
obey'd him?
Does pay the act of it, as, i' the contrary,
Why they are so, but, like to village-curs,
What's that, Butts?
'Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit
Most honour'd madam,
Remember your bold life too.
I read in's looks
She shall be, to the happiness of England,
Ye tell me what ye wish for both,--my ruin:
Ha! 'tis he, indeed:
Enter the KING HENRY VIII and DOCTOR BUTTS at a window above
England and France might, through their amity,
Laid nobly on her: which perform'd, the choir,
Could say 'This is my wife' there, all were woven
An't please
From her shall read the perfect ways of honour,
That longer you desire the court, as well
As soul and body's severing.
Authority so weighty.
A noble company! what are their pleasures?
There's mischief in this man: canst thou say further?
Never yet branded with suspicion?
The king shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank you.
subject, if not before the king, which stopped our
The articles o' the combination drew
His will is most malignant, and it stretches
The stamp of nobleness in any person
Forgetting, like a good man your late censure
That mould up such a mighty piece as this is,
Come, come, my lord, you'ld spare your spoons: you
And no man see me more.
O, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls,
Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles off
I make as little doubt, as you do conscience
Yes, 'tis the list
Be done in this and all things! I obey.
Domestics to you, serve your will as't please
Shall be, and make new nations: he shall flourish,
O' the jewel house,
Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be
His fears were, that the interview betwixt
Will be deceived, for, gentle hearers, know,
I have no spleen against you, nor injustice
Would move a monster.
Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks
From hence you be committed to the Tower,
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
None better in my kingdom. Get you gone,
Proceed.
More near my life, I fear,--with my weak wit,
It did take place, 'I do,' quoth he, 'perceive
Were those that went on each side of the queen?
To trust us in your business, we are ready
All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
If ye be any thing but churchmen's habits--
Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the king
Thy hopeful service perish too: good Cromwell,
O, you go far.
Of which there is not one, I dare avow,
If you are bound to us or no. What say you?
That I did.
Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send prosperous
That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,
Exit KING HENRY VIII, frowning upon CARDINAL WOLSEY: the Nobles throng after him, smiling and whispering
His confessor, who fed him every minute
And, by that virtue, no man dare accuse you.
Let's stand close, and behold him.
The chronicles of my doing, let me say
Wish him ten fathom deep: this duke as much
Well, the voice goes, madam:
As soon he shall by me, that thus the cardinal
And we must root him out. From your affairs
That she should feel the smart of this? The cardinal
Here's to your ladyship: and pledge it, madam,
commission and main power, took 'em from me, with
Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
Honour and plenteous safety--that you read
There must I be unloosed, although not there
So are you.
What is unsettled in the king.
Garter, in his coat of arms, and on his
'em. I'll scratch your heads: you must be seeing
O my lord,
The high promotion of his grace of Canterbury,
It is not you I call for:
Kisses her
In our long absence: pray, do not deliver
Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready
At all times to your will conformable,
And one, already, of the privy council.
Music ceases
From princes into pages: all men's honours
Yes, troth, and troth, you would not be a queen?
I hinder you too long: good night, Sir Thomas.
of the dog-days now reign in's nose, all that stand
Out with it boldly: truth loves open dealing.
With gentle travail, to the gladding of
Say not 'treasonous.'
Who waits there?
If my sight fail not,
That angels love good men with, even of her
'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
Is this your Christian counsel? out upon ye!
In us, thy friend: give me thy hand, stand up:
best breed in the north. When they were ready to
Am yet a courtier beggarly, nor could
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading:
So I have. Farewell
Between the king and you, and to deliver,
2. Then, two Judges.
Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY and CARDINAL CAMPEIUS
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
Of the king's grace and pardon. The grieved commons
Fit for a fool to fall by: what cross devil
My lord archbishop,
And save me so much talking.
Beyond all man's endeavours: my endeavours
To wear our mortal state to come with her,
Must pity drop upon her. Verily,
The willing'st sin I ever yet committed
Arrest thee of high treason, in the name
Held current music too.
Enter GARDINER, Bishop of Winchester, a Page with a torch before him, met by LOVELL
If you might please to stretch it.
It was a gentle business, and becoming
Is he ready
Who, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen,
He had a black mouth that said other of him.
If this salute my blood a jot: it faints me,
To attend your highness' pleasure.
4. Choristers, singing.
But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.
Most bitterly on you, as putter on
Thou hast made me now a man! never, before
And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.
An heretic, an arch one, Cranmer, one
Sir,
Spirits of peace, where are ye? are ye all gone,
And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords:
Belong to the gallows, and be hanged, ye rogue! is
I pray you, who, my lord?
The chief aim of his honour, and, to strengthen
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me!
Your grace must wait till you be call'd for.
That's the plain truth: your painted gloss discovers,
Enter Chamberlain
Against this man, whose honesty the devil
Here, so please you.
Exeunt NORFOLK and SUFFOLK
What say'st thou, ha?
Far from his succor, from the king, from all
Allegiance in them, their curses now
Exit GARDINER
Aside
He.
Whispers the Masquers
O, 'tis a tender place, and I must leave her.
In such a point of weight, so near mine honour,--
My faculties nor person, yet will be
And out of all these to restore the king,
We cannot feel too little, hear too much.
The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosen
My most dread sovereign, may it like your grace
For, being not propp'd by ancestry, whose grace
Sent down among 'em, which hath flaw'd the heart
Bestow your counsels on me: she now begs,
At a superfluous rate!
Enter DOCTOR BUTTS
The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems
It lies to cure me: and the cure is, to
To keep your earthly audit: sure, in that
SCENE IV. The palace yard.
And the mountain tops that freeze,
Could but be brought to know our ends are honest,
Which action's self was tongue to. All was royal,
Stand close up, or I'll make your head ache.
Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,
She will be sick else. This day, no man think
Both in his private conscience and his place,
I do not think he fears death.
That I am free of your report, he knows
I were malicious else.
His said he did, and with his deed did crown
Believe me, she has had much wrong: lord cardinal,
His serious considering.
And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see,
Hung their heads, and then lay by.
Observe, observe, he's moody.
To mow 'em down before me: but if I spared any
The chief cause concerns his grace of Canterbury.
'Tis well there's one above 'em yet. I had thought
It seems the marriage with his brother's wife
'Tis now too certain:
That gentleman of Buckingham's, in person
My honour'd lord.
Has the king this?
His highness shall speak in, I do beseech
So said her woman, and that her sufferance made
I take it, by all voices, that forthwith
Deliver them, and your appeal to us
You cannot with such freedom purge yourself,
How is the king employ'd?
For thine own future safety.
My good lord, have great care
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,
Find mercy in the law, 'tis his: if none,
In time will find their fit rewards. That seal,
Are all I can return. Beseech your lordship,
O, how, how?
What was that Hopkins?
Should have gone off.
Upon my wretched women, that so long
Have been mine so that evermore they pointed
To load a falling man.
Grow from the king's acquaintance, by this carriage.
With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee!
Sir Thomas Lovell, had the cardinal
Your grace is noble:
Because they speak no English, thus they pray'd
boys behind 'em, loose shot, delivered such a shower
And yet words are no deeds. My father loved you:
Will make my boldness manners. Now, good angels
To the Secretary
A royal lady, spake one the least word that might
The dignity of your office, is the point
And came to the eye o' the king: wherein was read,
And, if you can be merry then, I'll say
The king's late scruple, by the main assent
The air will drink the sap. To every county
Cannot stand under them: if you omit
My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,
When I came hither, I was lord high constable
And understand again like honest men,
Together sung 'Te Deum.' So she parted,
To foreign princes, 'Ego et Rex meus'
Further in the proceeding.
The tender leaves of hopes, to-morrow blossoms,
Out of our easiness and childish pity
Your lordship shall along. Come, good Sir Thomas,
Katharine Queen of England,  and c.
Though in her cradle, yet now promises
Speak freely.
My heart dropp'd love, my power rain'd honour, more
Confessor to him, with that devil-monk,
Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then
That he's revengeful, and I know his sword
I'll tell ye more.
But pared my present havings, to bestow
[Aside]  This is about that which the bishop spake:
I am the most unhappy woman living.
Is it therefore
shouldst feel
Exit
They promised me eternal happiness,
Hath spoken well and justly: therefore, madam,
Would it not grieve an able man to leave
Thanks you for this great care: I stood i' the level
wit near him, that railed upon me till her pinked
SCENE IV. A Hall in York Place.
To fair content and you: none here, he hopes,
Leap'd from his eyes: so looks the chafed lion
Marry, amen!
She is young, and of a noble modest nature,
I have no power to speak, sir.
The penance lies on you, if these fair ladies
Must fetch him in the papers.
Under your promised pardon. The subjects' grief
Heaven bless thee!
What's that?
I am happily come hither.
Have wish'd the sleeping of this business, never desired
That it do singe yourself: we may outrun,
Of singular integrity and learning,
For if the trial of the law o'ertake ye,
Outworths a noble's blood.
I do know
But where they mean to sink ye. All good people,
As cherubins, all guilt: the madams too,
For, since the cardinal fell, that title's lost:
The cause betwixt her and this great offender.
It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance panging
No more of that.
To one above itself. Each following day
The subject will deserve it. Such as give
And fair purgation to the world, than malice,
Good my lord cardinal, I have half a dozen healths
Shall still be doubled on her: truth shall nurse her,
Stay, my lord,
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
Let's think in private more.
Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel,
Pray you, arise,
Your enemies are many, and not small, their practises
That they may have their wages duly paid 'em,
Exeunt
What two reverend bishops
Prithee, to bed, and in thy prayers remember
There will be woe indeed, lords: the sly whoresons
As well as I am able. The rich stream
There,--on my conscience, put unwittingly?
I dare your worst objections: if I blush,
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak,
There's places of rebuke. He was a fool,
For my example.
Malice ne'er meant: our breach of duty this way
The common voice, I see, is verified
By a commission from the consistory,
To think what follows.
8. A canopy borne by four of the Cinque-ports,
And, as the long divorce of steel falls on me,
As not to know the language I have lived in:
That labour, sir. All's now done, but the ceremony
Is fresh about me.
To a prepared place in the choir, fell off
All the expected good we're like to hear
Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean,
I ever contradicted your desire,
To render up the great seal presently
And yet with charity. He was a man
As from a blushing handmaid, to his highness,
Was to them as a painting: now this masque
Sir,
Say, Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
I am glad
The wisest prince that there had reign'd by many
Unmasking
Enter Chamberlain and SANDS
Was a deep envious one.
To be high-steward, next, the Duke of Norfolk,
In such a business.
Come, you are pleasant.
Of divers witnesses, which the duke desired
dozens? Is this Moorfields to muster in? or have
Say his long trouble now is passing
An't please your grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's daughter--
Of the Cinque-ports.
And is his oracle.
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.
Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it
The greatness of his person.
For I must think of that which company
Pray, do my service to his majesty:
Exeunt
Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief,
Take him, and use him well, he's worthy of it.
Prithee, come hither: what fair lady's that?
Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What's the matter?
What is her name?
He was most princely: ever witness for him
I would your grace would give us but an hour
Nor shall this peace sleep with her: but as when
There should be one amongst 'em, by his person,
I do excuse you, yea, upon mine honour,
My lord chamberlain,
And without trial fell, God's peace be with him!
The secret of your conference?
In all humility unto his highness:
Enter CROMWELL, and stands amazed
They should find easy penance.
Therein illustrated: the honour of it
Let me ne'er see again.
I am confident,
him, SURREY, bearing the rod of silver with
Yes, that goodness
A thousand pounds a year for pure respect!
The queen is put in anger. You're excused:
You bear a gentle mind, and heavenly blessings
The heaviest and the worst
'Tis ten to one this play can never please
This is the king's ring.
Her coronation. Katharine no more
[Aside]	I may perceive
And say I spoke with you.
The queen is comfortless, and we forgetful
And, not reform'd, may prove pernicious.
That such a keech can with his very bulk
I'll hear him his confessions justify,
To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,
His royal self in judgment comes to hear
I was a chaste wife to my grave: embalm me,
As all think, for this business.
Was he mad, sir?
To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures,
My lord, we have
Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels
He shall again relate.
Out of this world, tell him, in death I bless'd him,
True, they are so:
If it conceived a male child by me, should
A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune
Enter Chamberlain
What 'tis you go about: to climb steep hills
May be absolved in English.
More stronger to direct you than yourself,
Saw you the cardinal?
God save you, sir! where have you been broiling?
SCENE III. An ante-chamber in the palace.
I know it,
I am not such a truant since my coming,
Since which she was removed to Kimbolton,
[Aside to NORFOLK]          I another.
Goodness and he fill up one monument!
A quiet night, and my good mistress will
He's traitor to the height.
This paper has undone me: 'tis the account
New customs,
Pursued him still: and, three nights after this,
Deserve our better wishes.
And all such false professors! would you have me--
I will say thus much for him, if a prince
The beauty of her person to the people.
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius
I did, Sir Thomas: and left him at primero
Sir?
And fee my friends in Rome. O negligence!
I tender my commission, by whose virtue,
And spotless shall mine innocence arise,
In humblest manner I require your highness,
But, my lord,
And never see the Louvre.
Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law:
Thomas Cromwell,
Is he found guilty?
His promises were, as he then was, mighty,
Absolved him with an axe.
Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him:
There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose
Can nothing render but allegiant thanks,
By heaven, she is a dainty one. Sweetheart,
Call him to present trial: if he may
I swear again, I would not be a queen
And worthily, my falsehood! yea, as much
Once more, my Lord of Winchester, I charge you,
Come pat betwixt too early and too late
With many children by you: if, in the course
[Aside]
The lag end of their lewdness and be laugh'd at.
Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on,
The whole realm, by your teaching and your chaplains,
Where she remains now sick.
His thinkings are below the moon, not worth
I wish it grubb'd up now.
This good man,--few of you deserve that title,--
fellow somewhat near the door, he should be a
Of this so noble and so fair assembly
I would your grace
Of our despised nobility, our issues,
Revenge upon the cardinal.
Whom the king hath in secrecy long married,
For, sure, there's no converting of 'em: now
I thank my memory, I yet remember
Saw ye none enter since I slept?
I am glad your grace has made that right use of it.
These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse,
To speak my mind of him: and indeed this day,
Elizabeth.
When she has so much English.
Our reverend cardinal carried.
your honour,
LOVELL seems to stay
Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes
That many mazed considerings did throng
Yet I am richer than my base accusers,
For you or any: how far I have proceeded,
Enter Keeper
Have not the power to muzzle him, therefore best
So are a number more.
She never knew harm-doing: O, now, after
Exit Secretary
My lord, I love you,
Shower'd on me daily, have been more than could
Exit Chamberlain
Or gentleman, that is not freely merry,
He was brought to this
Fears, and despairs, and all these for his marriage:
I know you have a gentle, noble temper,
Into whose hand I give thy life.
My royal choice.
I should have ta'en some pains to bring together
For truth's sake and his conscience, that his bones,
My bond to wedlock, or my love and duty,
Mend 'em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort?
I know my life so even. If your business
Whither so late?
Gives way to us, I much fear. If you cannot
Since last we saw in France?
I am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours.
My father's loss, like a most royal prince,
Pierce into that, but I can see his pride
and this man out of prison?
To hear such flattery now, and in my presence,
'Tis true: where is he, Denny?
and fight for bitten apples, that no audience, but
The sixth part of his substance, to be levied
Almost forgot my prayers to content him?
Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England
That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,
What need you note it? pray you, keep your way:
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashion'd
His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.
In it be memorised.
But his performance, as he is now, nothing:
And leave me out on't. Would I had no being,
A sure and safe one, though thy master miss'd it.
'Tis the same: high-steward.
Please you, sir,
Beyond thought's compass, that former fabulous story,
But that I am bound in charity against it!
That, had the king in his last sickness fail'd,
I'll follow and outstare him.
1. A lively flourish of Trumpets.
Your holy hat to be stamp'd on the king's coin.
But 'tis so lately alter'd, that the old name
Exeunt
Restored me to my honours, and, out of ruins,
Who dare cross 'em,
Upon this business my appearance make
Ladies, a general welcome from his grace
To the water side I must conduct your grace,
Amen.
The last is, for my men, they are the poorest,
That Cranmer is return'd with welcome,
Be gladded in't by me: then follows, that
Too hard an exclamation.
That man i' the world who shall report he has
Which, since they are of you, and odious,
[Aside]             What should this mean?
Hautboys
I humbly do entreat your highness' pardon,
His father by as much as a performance
I thank you, sir: had I not known those customs,
Abusing better men than they can be,
They swell, and grow as terrible as storms.
Your fears are worse.
That promises moe thousands: honour's train
To lead 'em once again, and then let's dream
The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?
Will have of these trim vanities!
Good sir, speak it to us.
You saw
If I know you well,
It seems you are in haste: an if there be
I' the privy chamber?
Papers of state he sent me to peruse,
Not ours, or not allow'd, what worst, as oft,
It to be stirr'd, but oft have hinder'd, oft,
Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died:
Yet freshly pitied in our memories.
And ever may your highness yoke together,
Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which
you rude rascals?
Some of these articles, and out they shall.
And when you would say something that is sad,
I know myself now, and I feel within me
With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favour?
Not your demand, it values not your asking:
Both of his truth and him, which was too far,
O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too:
How now!
Why, this it is, see, see!
Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
Is't possible the spells of France should juggle
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:
take the court for Paris-garden? ye rude slaves,
To rest awhile, some half an hour or so,
Like free and honest men, our just opinions
And sleep an act or two, but those, we fear,
It was much like to do: he answer'd, 'Tush,
I am a simple woman, much too weak
No other speaker of my living actions,
Who may that be, I pray you?
A most unnatural and faithless service!
It forged him some design, which, being believed,
May it please your grace,--
Out of his self-drawing web, he gives us note,
You have said well.
Of your best graces in your mind, the which
A bold brave gentleman. That should be
When the king knows my truth.
I am sorry my integrity should breed,
So.
As himself pleased, and they were ratified
That might have mercy on the fault thou gavest him,
Exeunt in manner as they entered
I thank your grace,
Not friended by by his wish, to your high person
And, like a mountain cedar, reach his branches
Distinctly his full function.
Well, we shall then know more, and Buckingham
But all hoods make not monks.
She'll with the labour end.
Not as a groom: there's some of ye, I see,
Bearing a state of mighty moment in't
You did nothing, sir.
Grievingly I think,
An untimely ague
That once were his, and is become as black
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr! Serve the king,
Being now seen possible enough, got credit,
Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth.
Can advise me like you: be to yourself
'T has done, upon the premises, but justice:
To have this young one made a Christian.
Banish'd the kingdom! Patience, is that letter,
She's a good creature, and, sweet lady, does
Yes, indeed, was I.
You do appear before them: if they shall chance,
Both for your honour better and your cause,
With these you bear already.
I thank ye heartily, so shall this lady,
[Aside to GARDINER]  Give me your hand much joy and
Most gracious sir,
side her, the Bishops of London and
I hear of none, but the new proclamation
You tender more your person's honour than
Made former wonders its. To-day the French,
If I have used myself unmannerly,
Who's there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
So dear in heart, not to deny her that
My studied purposes requite, which went
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
ACT V
We had need pray,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying
combustion in the state. I missed the meteor once,
Would come against you.
I will, my lord.
The best persuasions to the contrary
My lord, because we have business of more moment,
Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies,
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me--
'Tis no counterfeit.
To the good queen, possess'd him with a scruple
But he would bite none, just as I do now,
Shall govern England.'
I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell!
The daring'st counsel which I had to doubt,
Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted
To ABERGAVENNY
He did unseal them: and the first he view'd,
Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in,
Scruple, and prick, on certain speeches utter'd
If heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
Is he in person ready?
Who deem'd our marriage lawful: wherefore I humbly
A man that more detests, more stirs against,
As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest,
Whose honour heaven shield from soil!--even he
On you than any, so your hand and heart,
The king will suffer but the little finger
We shall be late else, which I would not be,
As they say spirits do, at midnight, have
That therefore such a writ be sued against you,
In their fair cheeks, my lord, then we shall have 'em
Came to the altar, where she kneel'd, and saint-like
You know no more than others, but you frame
Peace to your highness!
Place you that side, I'll take the charge of this:
Win straying souls with modesty again,
To be corrupt and treasonous.
For our best act. If we shall stand still,
I put it to your care.
porringer fell off her head, for kindling such a
Requires slow pace at first: anger is like
A thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their pleasures.
The cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads
Those suns of glory, those two lights of men,
To use so rude behavior, go to, kneel.
To him that made him proud, the pope.
The merciful construction of good women,
The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going,
Sometimes our brother's wife. This respite shook
It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,
Only a show or two, and so agree
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Of this new sect? ye are not sound.
Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle.
He never was so womanish, the cause
Who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants,
If your grace
First mine own service to your grace, the next,
But by particular consent proceeded
Still exaction!
And,--prithee, lead me in:
Those twins Of learning that he raised in you,
Bishop of Winchester. But know, I come not
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
O, that your lordship were but now confessor
For this great journey. What did this vanity
The part my father meant to act upon
Thou art a proud traitor, priest.
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me,
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
suspicious,
With you, my Lord of Lincoln, you remember
For more than blushing comes to: if your back
With words of sovereignty.
I left him private,
Excuse me,
Was he not held a learned man?
ANNE's train.
For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell,
Your long coat, priest, protects you, thou
But stop their mouths with stubborn bits, and spur 'em,
He be convented. He's a rank weed, Sir Thomas,
To give up willingly that noble title
head a gilt copper crown.
I love him not, nor fear him, there's my creed:
Without delay, and the pretence for this
For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
Exeunt QUEEN KATHARINE and her Attendants
Such a one, they all confess,
To scatter 'em, as 'tis to make 'em sleep
So I grow stronger, you more honour gain.
Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions
Is business of estate, in which we come
Or gild again the noble troops that waited
The very persons of our noble story
Madam, you'll find it so. You wrong your virtues
Here is a warrant from
I pray for heartily, that it may find
Seek me out, and that way I am wife in,
You i' the camlet, get up o' the rail,
As holy oil, Edward Confessor's crown,
Anne Bullen! No, I'll no Anne Bullens for him:
By me obey'd!
To hear this of him, and could wish he were
To sit here at this present, and behold
I mean the bishop, did require a respite,
We are a queen, or long have dream'd so, certain
Still him in praise: and, being present both
But, I beseech you, what's become of Katharine,
To keep mine honour from corruption,
What kind of my obedience I should tender,
And see him safe i' the Tower.
Your scruple to the voice of Christendom:
Which we have not done neither: that, I fear,
This cardinal,
Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?
Avoid the gallery.
She is going, wench: pray, pray.
To tell your grace, that, having heard by fame
on his head, bearing a long white wand, as
The Lord forbid!
In seeking tales and informations
That's clapp'd upon the court-gate.
You see the poor remainder--could distribute,
10. Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain
For ever by your grace, whose hand has raised me.
Have satisfied the king for his divorce,
How to live better. For your stubborn answer
And of your choice, these reverend fathers, men
My prayers to heaven for you, my loyalty,
We are too open here to argue this,
At all a friend to truth.
Only about her coronation.
For further life in this world I ne'er hope,
Though they be never so ridiculous,
I mean, in perjured witness, than your master,
Let silence be commanded.
Remove these thoughts from you: the which before
To him that does best: God forbid else. Cardinal,
Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else
As I am made without him, so I'll stand,
Exeunt
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
I could not personally deliver to her
They say, in great extremity, and fear'd
'Twould prove the verity of certain words
That was sent to me from the council, pray'd me
attending.
Exeunt
Enter two Gentlemen, meeting one another
Alas, good lady!
Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir,
There take an inventory of all I have,
Bar his access to the king, never attempt
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye,
Prithee, return: with thy approach, I know,
Has done this, and 'tis well, for worthy Wolsey,
In what have I offended you? what cause
Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns--
I speak it with a single heart, my lords,
Give him a little earth for charity!'
Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry,
Show'd like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were
To this last costly treaty, the interview,
Things done without example, in their issue
Must give my tendence to.
Is found a truth now: for it grows again
In celebration of this day with shows,
'Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take't of me,
All goodness
My noble gossips, ye have been too prodigal:
Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out,
Heaven has an end in all: yet, you that hear me,
Keep comfort to you, and this morning see
Not sound?
No new device to beat this from his brains?
Of such a time: being my sworn servant,
I hope she will deserve well,--and a little
You have, by fortune and his highness' favours,
These should be hours for necessities,
How much her grace is alter'd on the sudden?
A worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much pain
Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life
God and your majesty
But that slander, sir,
Let me have it,
The hearts of princes kiss obedience,
Have uncontemn'd gone by him, or at least
Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be,
And service to his majesty and you,
Grievous complaints of you, which, being consider'd,
Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
Of our flesh, few are angels: out of which frailty
He sent command to the lord mayor straight
The king cried Ha! at this.
Be't so. Proceed.
Enter a Messenger
Stay there, sir,
At which appear'd against him his surveyor,
That it shall please you to declare, in hearing
Your grace is grown so pleasant.
As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
That little thought, when she set footing here,
I mean, who set the body and the limbs
Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel,
The red wine first must rise
I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,--
He stretch'd him, and, with one hand on his dagger,
Has crept too near his conscience.
So I hear.
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
So farewell to the little good you bear me.
She curtsies to KING HENRY VIII, and offers to depart
By that sin fell the angels, how can man, then,
The hopes of court! my hopes in heaven do dwell.
Was either pitied in him or forgotten.
Exeunt LOVELL and DENNY
There was the weight that pull'd me down. O Cromwell,
Before you open it.
SCENE I. London. QUEEN KATHARINE's apartments.
For my little cure,
Item, you sent a large commission
Lodged in the abbey, where the reverend abbot,
Some little memory of me will stir him--
And, to be short, for not appearance and
In England
Look out there, some of ye.
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
I would not be so sick though for his place:
Thou scarlet sin, robb'd this bewailing land
Those men are happy, and so are all are near her.
And stand unshaken yours.
His eye against the moon: in most strange postures
In their embracement, as they grew together,
The action of good women: there is hope
I'll hang my head and perish.
we some strange Indian with the great tool come to
Yea, subject to your countenance, glad or sorry
I have received much honour by your presence,
To-morrow morning to the council-board
The grave does to the dead, for her male issue
They pass over the stage in order and state
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
This dangerous conception in this point.
To let the troop pass fairly, or I'll find
Lest he should help his father.
He tells you rightly.
Has left the cause o' the king unhandled, and
This Ipswich fellow's insolence, or proclaim
I have a suit which you must not deny me,
Among my maids: full little, God knows, looking
Of this commission? I believe, not any.
During my life, and, to confirm his goodness,
And to say so no more.
Yes, my lord.
Wherein? and what taxation? My lord cardinal,
Prithee, call Gardiner to me, my new secretary:
To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.
Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing,
You're welcome,
From Ampthill where the princess lay, to which
Continue in my liking? nay, gave notice
No great offence belongs to't, give your friend
But leave their flocks, and, under your fair conduct,
The ambassador is silenced?
Met in the vale of Andren.
THE ORDER OF THE CORONATION
Know you of this taxation?
Walks and whispers
I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit
Even the billows of the sea,
Is our best having.
However, yet there is no great breach, when it comes,
Were you there?
Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank you,
Madam, this is a mere distraction,
To CARDINAL CAMPEIUS
If not from hell? the devil is a niggard,
Forbear, for shame, my lords.
This from a dying man receive as certain:
She was often cited by them, but appear'd not:
There's his period,
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,
Ipswich and Oxford! one of which fell with him,
PROLOGUE
Invite me to a banquet, whose bright faces
Shall see this, and bless heaven.
And found the blessedness of being little:
Yet filed with my abilities: mine own ends
His highness having lived so long with her, and she
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
Know you not
A most unspotted lily shall she pass
Old Lady:	'Tis strange: a three-pence bow'd would hire me,
'Tis woful.
Our hard-ruled king. Again, there is sprung up
You are young, Sir Harry Guildford.
Have broken with the king, who hath so far
All this was order'd by the good discretion
That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound,
This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
He of Winchester
May you be happy in your wish, my lord
of pebbles, that I was fain to draw mine honour in,
Though he be grown so desperate to be honest,
Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom
From any private malice in his end,
If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake,
Live where their prayers did: and it's come to pass,
This secret is so weighty, 'twill require
The faith they have in tennis, and tall stockings,
I guess thy message. Is the queen deliver'd?
As I live,
You cannot show me.
In the great'st humbleness, and desired your highness
Does whet his anger to him.
It grieves many:
The king will venture at it. Either the cardinal,
What a loss our ladies
The clergy in example.
Enter Guard
That never knew what truth meant: I now seal it,
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
Let it go round.
Mark but my fall, and that that ruin'd me.
As I would wish mine enemy.
Turns what he list. The king will know him one day.
An honest country lord, as I am, beaten
Exeunt
ACT II
By what means got, I leave to your own conscience--
And, though we leave it with a root, thus hack'd,
As I belong to worship and affect
'Tis well said again,
The most remark'd i' the kingdom. As for Cromwell,
With the mere rankness of their joy.
Foretold should be his last, full of repentance,
All the commons
He parted frowning from me, as if ruin
To have you therein my companion.
Have stood to charity, and display'd the effects
What should you do, but knock 'em down by the
My good lord,
I were unmannerly, to take you out,
Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
A right good husband, let him be a noble
Free pardon to each man that has denied
Of fool and feather that they got in France,
And my integrity to heaven, is all
[Within]                 Come back: what mean you?
For so I know he is, they know he is,
I know his noble nature--not to let
That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,
I know but of a single part, in aught
Old as I am, to queen it: but, I pray you,
Our daughter Mary: i' the progress of this business,
To be her mistress' mistress! the queen's queen!
SCENE II. The same. The council-chamber.
You'ld venture an emballing: I myself
You'ld feel more comfort: why should we, good lady,
And so we'll leave you to your meditations
What's the need?
Good sir, have patience.
For, I profess, you have it.
Stood here observing him: some strange commotion
On that celestial harmony I go to.
Whither away so fast?
Among the crowd i' the Abbey, where a finger
He solemnly had sworn, that what he spoke
A long time out of play, may bring his plainsong
You met him half in heaven: my vows and prayers
But where he meant to ruin, pitiful:
For it an archbishop.
My mind's not on't, you are too hard for me.
Say, Henry King of England, come into the court.
Which reformation must be sudden too,
A league between his highness and Ferrara.
The foulness is the punishment. I presume
SCENE I. Westminster. A street.
That he may furnish and instruct great teachers,
Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom:
To sheathe his knife in us. He is attach'd,
Can make good people. O, my lord, you're tardy:
The more shame for ye: holy men I thought ye,
Do what ye will, my lords: and, pray, forgive me,
I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him
And his disciples only envy at,
Well said, my lord.
Look into these affairs see this main end,
Music. Dance
Will bless the king: and is not this course pious?
Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall
Fairly answer'd,
It is to see a nobleman want manners.
O lord archbishop,
Sir,
A fit or two o' the face, but they are shrewd ones,
How does your grace?
Madam, you wrong the king's love with these fears:
By all that's holy, he had better starve
I weigh'd the danger which my realms stood in
It's heaven's will:
Repeat your will and take it.
Or God will punish me. I do believe,
You are mine enemy, and make my challenge
Your grace,
Then lay me forth: although unqueen'd, yet like
My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl
The image of his Maker, hope to win by it?
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
Then you lost
A noise within, crying 'Room for the Queen!' Enter  QUEEN KATHARINE, ushered by NORFOLK, and SUFFOLK:  she kneels. KING HENRY VIII riseth from his state, takes her up, kisses and placeth her by him
Above a number, if my actions
And more and richer, when he strains that lady:
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
More than, I fear, you are provided for.
If you will now unite in your complaints,
Exeunt
Would I had known no more! but she must die,
[Kneeling]
Let me speak, sir,
Might go one way, and safely, and the end
As if it fed ye! and how sleek and wanton
Then mark the inducement. Thus it came, give heed to't:
The force of his own merit makes his way
I take it, she that carries up the train
Against your sacred person, in God's name,
Follow your envious courses, men of malice,
With my well saying!
That for your highness' good I ever labour'd
Patience, be near me still, and set me lower:
All the best men are ours, for 'tis ill hap,
Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
I would not be a queen.
I am fall'n indeed.
Good day to both your graces.
So fare you well, my little good lord cardinal.
Have put his knife to him.'
You are a saucy fellow:
O Griffith, sick to death!
All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady,
On May-day morning, which will never be:
Now, madam, may his highness live in freedom,
I am not worthy yet to wear: I shall, assuredly.
Enter two Gentlemen, meeting
Collars of SS.
If we did think
Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,
There is a mutiny in's mind. This morning
By this my issue's fail, and that gave to me
The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There is a
At any time speak aught?
With meekness and humility, but your heart
Within
Together, to consider further that
May hourly fall upon ye!
How under my oppression I did reek,
Let some o' the guard be ready there.
What his high hatred would effect wants not
Beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung
My lord, you'll bear us company?
And am right glad to catch this good occasion
And corn shall fly asunder: for, I know,
I thank you, honest lord. Remember me
I feel my heart new open'd. O, how wretched
For 'twas indeed his colour, but he came
Do not I know you for a favourer
You were the duke's surveyor, and lost your office
[Aside]	'Tis Butts,
If the king please, his curses and his blessings
But now I am past an comforts here, but prayers.
To hear from him a matter of some moment:
Made me put this main secret in the packet
Is named, your wars in France: this makes bold mouths:
Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor, and John Car,
Salutes ye all, this night he dedicates
Pass away frowning.
A royal train, believe me. These I know:
And our consent, for better trial of you,
Heaven's peace be with him!
How does his highness?
You should be lord ambassador from the emperor,
But, sir, sir,
More than I dare make faults. You few that loved me,
I caused you write, yet sent away?
As I saw it inclined: when was the hour
A proper title of a peace, and purchased
Ay, my good lord.
Much weightier than this work. The queen's in labour,
SCENE I. London. A gallery in the palace.
As much as one sound cudgel of four foot--
And able means, we had not parted thus.
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly,
And have an hour of hearing, and, by'r lady,
Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,
Things done well,
His practises to light?
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
They have sent me such a man I would have wish'd for.
Since virtue finds no friends--a wife, a true one?
Why, how now, Cromwell!
So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!
You take a precipice for no leap of danger,
Make me no more ado, but all embrace him:
Your office, sergeant, execute it.
I told my lord the duke, by the devil's illusions
Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she,
You shall to the Tower.
And, must needs say, a noble one, which makes me,
The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,
this reason: His master would be served before a
Faith, how easy?
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear
And sometimes falling ones.
To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords,
With maiden flowers, that all the world may know
Who had been hither sent on the debating
That were the authors.
They choose Ladies for the dance. KING HENRY VIII chooses ANNE
A spleeny Lutheran, and not wholesome to
How does your grace?
For all the mud in Egypt: have you heard it?
I do refuse you for my judge, and here,
A distance from her, while her grace sat down
Look'd he o' the inside of the paper?
Whose fault is this?
To his music plants and flowers
Yet are the king's, and, till my soul forsake,
The usurper Richard, who, being at Salisbury,
His contemplation were above the earth,
Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,
He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one,
Enter KING HENRY VIII and SUFFOLK
Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt
For holy offices I have a time, a time
That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism,
Shut door upon me, and so give me up
Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, regina
I haste now to my setting: I shall fall
Then you are weakly made: pluck off a little,
All good people,
That when I am in heaven I shall desire
I came this way so happily: the king
Then that you have sent innumerable substance--
The Spaniard, tied blood and favour to her,
He is vex'd at something.
The beauty of this kingdom, I'll assure you.
To swear against you? such things have been done.
Springs out into fast gait, then stops again,
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
Lofty and sour to them that loved him not,
As far as I see, all the good our English
Hear me, Sir Thomas: you're a gentleman
Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.
Thou speakest wonders.
Into your own hands, cardinal, by extortion,
With which the time will load him. The archbishop
'Tis like a pardon after execution:
To the disposing of it nought rebell'd.
Well, well, my lords, respect him,
Did break i' the rinsing.
She intends unto his holiness.
Such a compounded one?
Pray, speak what has happen'd.
escapes not
The law I bear no malice for my death,
And by that name must die: yet, heaven bear witness,
Pray, speak in English: here are some will thank you,
You speak not like yourself, who ever yet
For me, my lords,
Every man,
Your brain, and every function of your power,
For fear we wake her: softly, gentle Patience.
Methinks I could
Enter ANNE and an Old Lady
Exeunt
When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,
Let it alone, my state now will but mock me.
There's difference in no persons.
'Tis so.
By holy Mary, Butts, there's knavery:
'Tis very true: but that time offer'd sorrow,
The clothiers all, not able to maintain
His spell in that is out: the king hath found
Or but allay, the fire of passion.
There's fresher air, my lord,
But, whatsoe'er thou takest me for, I'm sure
Re-enter to CARDINAL WOLSEY, NORFOLK and SUFFOLK, SURREY, and the Chamberlain
I'll tell you in a little. The great duke
What, are you chafed?
Before he go to bed. I'll take my leave.
And so stand fix'd: peace, plenty, love, truth, terror,
To plead your cause: it shall be therefore bootless
Is poison to thy stomach.
A new hell in himself.
Go forward.
For not bestowing on him, at his asking,
After all this, how did he bear himself?
Why the devil,
A monk o' the Chartreux.
Enter Old Lady, LOVELL following
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VIII and Guard
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
Either for such men or such business.
You'll show a little honesty.
The honourable board of council out,
To rank our chosen truth with such a show
I then moved you,
'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases
You have Christian warrant for 'em, and, no doubt,
I would not be a young count in your way,
Enter a Gentleman
That am a poor and humble subject to you?
Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
Under his own vine, what he plants, and sing
Who can be angry now? what envy reach you?
Drinks
The prime man of the state? I pray you, tell me,
ACT I
To one man's honour, this contagious sickness,
I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams
An hour of revels with 'em.
Yes, if I make my play.
Born out of your dominions, having here
To do me this last right.
The question did at first so stagger me,
And not to kiss you. A health, gentlemen!
To men that understand you, words and weakness.
Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity,
Surely, sir,
Yea, the whole consistory of Rome. You charge me
To think upon the part of business which
The net has fall'n upon me! I shall perish
So excellent in art, and still so rising,
For no dislike i' the world against the person
In this man's place before him?
Your grace must needs deserve all strangers' loves,
For your own quiet, as to rectify
And if I have a co nscience, let it sink me,
As great in admiration as herself,
SCENE V. The palace.
Your grace may enter now.
My noble lords, for those that tame wild horses
Paid ere he promised, whereby his suit was granted
Your faithful friends o' the suburbs? We shall have
Upon what cause, wrong you? alas, our places,
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
And far enough from court too.
Over the king in's tongue.
He could not sit his mule.
Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
A strong faith to conceal it.
Do.
Breed him some prejudice, for from this league
Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,
My lords, I care not, so much I am happy
Lady,
Henry King of England,  and c.
Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
And with some other business put the king
Was ever, to do well: nor is there living,
Before you all, appeal unto the pope,
Now, all my joy
And pardon comes: I shall anon advise you
And for his own advantage.
This, and all else
Enter BRANDON, a Sergeant-at-arms before him, and two or three of the Guard
You are so noble. To your highness' hand
She is asleep: good wench, let's sit down quiet,
These lazy knaves? Ye have made a fine hand, fellows:
Who's best in favour. Let the music knock it.
A noise of targets, or to see a fellow
There is, betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
Of all the gentry, for the most part such
I will, when you are humble, nay, before,
Most pestilent to the bearing, and, to bear 'em,
Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven
A trembling contribution! Why, we take
Say, ay, and of a boy.
leave your gaping.
But those that sought it I could wish more Christians:
A Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months.
Cry the amen, and yet my conscience says
I shower a welcome on ye, welcome all.
That trick of state
Most heartily to pray for her.
By heaven, I will,
Than I myself, poor man.
In truth, I know not. I was set at work
His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,
Lo, you, my lord,
Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together
Ha! what, so rank? Ah ha!
Who did guide,
And something spoke in choler, ill, and hasty:
The will of heaven be done, and the king's pleasure
Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst,
So strangely in one piece.
Good master porter, I belong to the larder.
He were mine enemy? what friend of mine
I dare and must deny it. Now I feel
The cardinal's malice and his potency
What say they?
A better wife, let him in nought be trusted,
That durst disperse it.
For France hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'd
Lord cardinal,
How was it?
That's somewhat sudden:
That was he
A woman, I dare say without vain-glory,
Sharp enough,
In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince,
Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you
There, my lord:
Pages, and footboys.
Concerning the French journey: I replied,
Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,
The bosom of my conscience, enter'd me,
To his own hand, in's bedchamber.
Make way there for the princess.
They are devised by you, or else you suffer
Without indurance, further.
Let there be letters writ to every shire,
Made it a fool and beggar. The two kings,
Lady mine, proceed.
Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and servants.
To have brought viva voce to his face:
At least, good manners, as not thus to suffer
These are the limbs o' the plot: no more, I hope.
Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY and CARDINAL CAMPEIUS, with a commission
Till death, that winter, kill it.
This bold bad man.
penance: that fire-drake did I hit three times on
Deliver all with charity.
And to such men of gravity and learning,
Pray heaven, he sound not my disgrace! For certain,
The pride upon them, that their very labour
Those articles, my lord, are in the king's hand:
Noise and tumult within. Enter Porter and his Man
And something over to remember me by:
How grounded he his title to the crown,
I have perused her well,
The monk might be deceived, and that 'twas dangerous for him
Go thy ways, Kate:
Shall understand it presently.
Their clothes are after such a pagan cut too,
[Aside to SUFFOLK]      If it do,
To furnish Rome, and to prepare the ways
gold, wrought with flowers, bearing QUEEN
My surveyor is false, the o'er-great cardinal
By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Hopkins.
running banquet of two beadles that is to come.
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
And wisdom of my council, but I find none.
Their money out of hope they may believe,
Say, Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory,
To bless your eye withal.
Doublets, I think,--flew up, and had their faces
These news are every where, every tongue speaks 'em,
When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness,
I told your grace they would talk anon.
Sends you his princely commendations,
Order gave each thing view, the office did
I am a most poor woman, and a stranger,
I cannot blame his conscience.
Exeunt CARDINAL WOLSEY and his Train
My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,
[Aside to CARDINAL WOLSEY]
All will be well.
After your highness had reproved the duke
He will have all, I think.
And after, this: and then to breakfast with
Abused extremely, and to cry 'That's witty!'
This same Cranmer's
At my misfortunes? can thy spirit wonder
under it, QUEEN ANNE in her robe, in her hair
But, will the king
Let me be used with honour: strew me over
Who from the sacred ashes of her honour
Proud lord, thou liest:
Of private conference.
'Tis now the king's, and call'd Whitehall.
The nature of it? in what kind, let's know,
Ye have found him, cardinal:
Thus far,
Pray, sir, be patient: 'tis as much impossible--
Madam, you are call'd back.
Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able to endure.
As I would be forgiven: I forgive all,
Must I go like a traitor thither?
And merely to revenge him on the emperor
My lords, you speak your pleasures:
Were tried by every tongue, every eye saw 'em,
In her days every man shall eat in safety,
I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now
You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him:
Nay, we must longer kneel: I am a suitor.
She's a stranger now again.
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on.
Ye must all see the queen, and she must thank ye,
Abound, as thick as thought could make 'em, and
This was his gentleman in trust--of him
Deals with our cardinal, and, as I trow,--
I swear he is true--hearted, and a soul
To bring my whole cause 'fore his holiness,
Employ'd you where high profits might come home,
I sent the king? Is there no way to cure this?
And bears his blushing honours thick upon him,
Hardly conceive of me, let it be noised
Bow themselves when he did sing:
That holy duty, out of dear respect,
Is, that his noble grace would have some pity
I shall both find your lordship judge and juror,
That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
So, so,
SCENE II. Kimbolton.
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye:
How you do talk!
And, when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Come, gentlemen, ye shall go my way, which
So please your highness,
And from a mouth of honour quite cry down
Till now I never knew thee!
'Gainst me, that I cannot take peace with:
Have moved us and our council, that you shall
For all this spice of your hypocrisy:
Shall be call'd queen, but princess dowager
No, we'll no Bullens. Speedily I wish
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.
Take up the rays o' the beneficial sun
The justice and the truth o' the question carries
And those of true condition, that your subjects
With all the choicest music of the kingdom,
To be revenged on him.
Whose health and royalty I pray for.
I speak my good lord cardinal to this point,
The back is sacrifice to the load. They say
Fell by our servants, by those men we loved most,
Embrace and love this man.
This candle burns not clear: 'tis I must snuff it,
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
Then lays his finger on his temple, straight
I think you have hit the mark: but is't not cruel
That's news indeed.
To know your royal pleasure.
You, that have so fair parts of woman on you,
Toward the king first, then his laws, in filling
Deliver this with modesty to the queen.
Have I not made you,
His own opinion was his law: i' the presence
Was,--were he evil used, he would outgo
Exeunt
Sure, he does not:
Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean
Pray heaven, the king may never find a heart
So much fairer
There was a lady once, 'tis an old story,
Of all this table, say so.
One general tongue unto us, this good man,
Not to come off, in his displeasure.
In such an honour: how may I deserve it
Given ear to our complaint, of his great grace
Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons--
Or pack to their old playfellows: there, I take it,
Pray for me! I must now forsake ye: the last hour
Take notice, lords, he has a loyal breast,
Ladies, you are not merry: gentlemen,
'Tis full of woe: yet I can give you inkling
Be known unto us: are you all agreed, lords?
Heaven comfort her!
I fear, too much.
Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
That had a head to hit, either young or old,
And lift my soul to heaven. Lead on, o' God's name.
Whom once more I present unto your highness.
Almost no grave allow'd me: like the lily,
So may he rest, his faults lie gently on him!
Laid any scruple in your way, which might
And want of wisdom, you, that best should teach us,
Certainly
What think you of a duchess? have you limbs
Was in his countenance. You he bade
When these so noble benefits shall prove
Be patient yet.
To make this present summons: unsolicited
Enter BUCKINGHAM from his arraignment, tip-staves  before him, the axe with the edge towards him,  halberds on each side: accompanied with LOVELL, VAUX, SANDS, and common people
For what they have been: 'tis a cruelty
When they pass back from the christening.
If ever any malice in your heart
As give a crutch to the dead: but our count-cardinal
No, sir, it does not please me.
Sir, you cannot.
ACT III
I stood not in the smile of heaven, who had
He bores me with some trick: he's gone to the king,
Then deputy of Ireland, who removed,
And, pray, receive 'em nobly, and conduct 'em
Ere it was ask'd, but when the way was made,
A little happier than my wretched father:
A man may weep upon his wedding-day.
I think would better please 'em: by my life,
Be sure you be not loose, for those you make friends
We must not rend our subjects from our laws,
Betwixt you and the cardinal. I advise you--
are like to dance these three days, besides the
If I loved many words, lord, I should tell you
Hearts of most hard temper
Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him
Well, sir, what follows?
The daughter of a king, my drops of tears
A man in much esteem with the king, and truly
Enter NORFOLK at one door, at the other, BUCKINGHAM and ABERGAVENNY
Hath crawl'd into the favour of the king,
And to that woman, when she has done most,
My Lord of Winchester, you are a little,
You have here, lady,
life, long, and ever happy, to the high and mighty
The king, that gave it.
To me you cannot reach, you play the spaniel,
You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,
Ye speak like honest men, pray God, ye prove so!
No, not for all the riches under heaven.
And hang their heads with sorrow: good grows with her:
Be sad, as we would make ye: think ye see
For this play at this time, is only in
Body o' me, where is it?
And free us from his slavery.
Had the full view of, such a noise arose
To whisper Wolsey,--here makes visitation:
I would I were,
Looking on QUEEN ANNE
Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
His faults lie open to the laws, let them,
There to remain till the king's further pleasure
Your rage mistakes us.
Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot
Does purpose honour to you no less flowing
Her ashes new create another heir,
Matter against me, and his eye reviled
'Tis midnight, Charles,
Exit CROMWELL
He gave his honours to the world again,
May be, he hears the king
Has business at his house, for all shall stay:
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,
You shall, sir: did you not of late days hear
Is only bitter to him, only dying,
You'll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that rock
What is your pleasure with me?
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
Into our hands, and to confine yourself
Of thousand friends, then in a moment, see
Beware you lose it not: for us, if you please
Now, God incense him,
I had rather want those than my head. Have at you!
And that I would not for a cow, God save her!
That I have blown this coal: I do deny it:
They should be good men, their affairs as righteous:
By all the laws of war you're privileged.
As, to the Tower, I thought, I would have play'd
You sent me deputy for Ireland,
You may, then, spare that time.
circlets of gold without flowers.
He has, and we shall see him
They're come already from the christening:
To the good of your most sacred person and
SCENE III. The Council-Chamber.
And heartily entreats you take good comfort.
I say again, there is no English soul
christenings? do you look for ale and cakes here,
Should find a running banquet ere they rested,
Hautboys. Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, and takes his state
She shall be loved and fear'd: her own shall bless her,
[Kneeling]              It is my duty
To gain the love o' the commonalty: the duke
No, my lord,
Enter Chancellor, places himself at the upper end  of the table on the left hand, a seat being left  void above him, as for CRANMER's seat. SUFFOLK,  NORFOLK, SURREY, Chamberlain, GARDINER, seat  themselves in order on each side. CROMWELL at lower end, as secretary. Keeper at the door
The devil speed him! no man's pie is freed
In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
Ta'en of your many virtues, the king's majesty
But to be commanded
A minister in his power. You know his nature,
The fore-recited practises, whereof
Use us and it.
The view of earthly glory: men might say,
Which had they, what four throned ones could have weigh'd
Richly in two short hours. Only they
Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him?
Commanded nature, that my lady's womb,
Some touch of your late business: affairs, that walk,
Would have flung from him, but, indeed, he could not:
His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave
Is not my friend: this, to confirm my welcome,
I  do pronounce him in that very shape
A gentleman, sent from the king, to see you.
Even to the hall, to hear what shall become
Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste
To whom in favour she shall give the day,
I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine,
But once he slander'd me with bastardy:
Go, Faulconbridge: now hast thou thy desire,
Lies heavy on me, O, my heart is sick!
Have done me shame: brave soldier, pardon me,
Before I drew this gallant head of war,
A ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear
Our just and lineal entrance to our own,
And fought the holy wars in Palestine,
Her highness is in safety, fear you not:
Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth!
And follow me with speed: I'll to the king:
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.
Will bring this labour to an happy end.
Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns
Go, bear him in thine arms.
We must awake endavour for defence,
Holding the eternal spirit against her will,
Even on that altar where we swore to you
Look to thyself, thou art in jeopardy.
Then let confusion of one part confirm
For many carriages he hath dispatch'd
Therefore to arms! be champion of our church,
Made to run even upon even ground,
Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.
Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
Holds hand with any princess of the world.
The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.
When adverse foreigners affright my towns
The world, who of itself is peised well,
May know wherefore we took the sacrament
I'll smoke your skin-coat, an I catch you right,
Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say,
'Tis true, to hurt his master, no man else.
Some airy devil hovers in the sky
The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest,
Aside
What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,
Philip of France, in right and true behalf
Thou darest not say so, villain, for thy life.
But truth is truth: large lengths of seas and shores
Bequeath thy land to him and follow me?
Full thirty thousand marks of English coin.
O Lord! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son!
Upon his death-bed he by will bequeath'd
I beg cold comfort, and you are so strait
And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,
Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers:
My mother dead!
After such bloody toil, we bid good night,
A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,
If you had won it, certainly you had.
Why then you must. Will you put out mine eyes?
In moral fury half so peremptory,
Even in the instant of repair and health,
This ship-boy's semblance hath disguised me quite.
Their iron indignation 'gainst your walls:
Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.
Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground,
Before the eye and prospect of your town,
Shall gild her bridal bed and make her rich
Enough to stifle such a villain up.
But in despair die under their black weight.
Figured quite o'er with burning meteors.
Wherein we step after a stranger march
Spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman.
Pray that their burthens may not fall this day,
Who, with his shears and measure in his hand,
Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury:
When with a volley of our needless shot,
Enter a Messenger
But we will make it subject to this boy.
That is well known, and, as I think, one father:
O me! it is my mother. How now, good lady!
I am not mad: I would to heaven I were!
I will denounce a curse upon his head.
And ta'en, I fear.
Anon becomes a mountain. O noble Dauphin,
From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
And being not done, where doing tends to ill,
Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.
Is much more general than these lines import.
Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amazed
And I did never ask it you again,
Acquainted me with interest to this land,
Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed,--
Or if that surly spirit, melancholy,
Being none of his, refuse him: this concludes,
In such a love so vile a lout as he.
Because he hath a half-face, like my father.
And so shall you, being beaten: do but start
And chase the native beauty from his cheek
Sound on into the drowsy race of night,
And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.
I did not think to be so sad to-night
For putting on so new a fashion'd robe.
Saint George, that swinged the dragon, and e'er since
SCENE III. The same.
Lo, in this right hand, whose protection
And say there is no sin but to be rich,
And more, more strong, then lesser is my fear,
Must be as boisterously maintain'd as gain'd,
And my good friend, thy voluntary oath
stay behind
Grow great by your example and put on
They burn in indignation. I repent:
And whereso'er this foot of mine doth tread,
Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers:
Whether hadst thou rather be a Faulconbridge
SCENE I. The French King's pavilion.
SCENE II. The same. Plains near Angiers.
To him and his usurp'd authority.
Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears
Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears?
What in the world should make me now deceive,
This act is as an ancient tale new told,
Between compulsion and a brave respect!
Let go the hand of that arch-heretic,
That blood which owed the breadth of all this isle,
Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,
The blood of malice in a vein of league,
To be a secondary at control,
Had baked thy blood and made it heavy-thick,
Which we, God knows, have turn'd another way,
Upon Good-Friday and ne'er broke his fast:
Enter KING JOHN, PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and other Lords
When living blood doth in these temples beat,
For any foreign preparation
Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,
With unhack'd swords and helmets all unbruised,
I must be brief, lest resolution drop
O, now you look like Hubert! all this while
Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smilest
Or rather then set forward, for 'twill be
Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!
Enter the BASTARD
As in a theatre, whence they gape and point
And let young Arthur, Duke of Bretagne, in,
By this brave duke came early to his grave:
Believe me, I do not believe thee, man,
And foul imaginary eyes of blood
Against the brows of this resisting town.
Lions more confident, mountains and rocks
Uncleanly scruples! fear not you: look to't.
No had, my lord! why, did you not provoke me?
May be he will not touch young Arthur's life,
Deliver him to safety, and return,
And I with him, and many moe with me,
I have disclaim'd sir Robert and my land,
Another lean unwash'd artificer
Our thunder from the south
I will upon all hazards well believe
Makes it take head from all indifferency,
Out of the bloody fingers' ends of John.
This must not be thus borne: this will break out
Of smiling peace to march a bloody host,
The uncleanly savours of a slaughter-house,
SCENE V. The French camp.
Alas, what need you be so boisterous-rough?
Sir Richard, what think you? have you beheld,
Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow:
Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.
I am too high-born to be propertied,
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
Nay, after that, consume away in rust
I am no villain.
Enter a Messenger
And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert:
We will bear home that lusty blood again
But with my breath I can revive it, boy.
If I in act, consent, or sin of thought,
Than if you had at leisure known of this.
By how much unexpected, by so much
Exeunt Executioners
The grappling vigour and rough frown of war
The better act of purposes mistook
Not for my life: but yet I dare defend
As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs!
Whose leisure I have stay'd, have given him time
Assured loss before the match be play'd.
Hubert, keep this boy. Philip, make up:
France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away?
And meritorious shall that hand be call'd,
Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
Of this most fair occasion, by the which
Or else it must go wrong with you and me:
Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.
Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!
That this my mother's son was none of his,
He show'd his warrant to a friend of mine:
To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips
Madam, I was not old sir Robert's son:
Who, as you say, took pains to get this son,
Upon the spot of this enforced cause,--
That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks.
And grapple with him ere he comes so nigh.
Whatever torment you do put me to.
He speaks plain cannon fire, and smoke and bounce,
But now in arms you strengthen it with yours:
I am thy grandam, Richard, call me so.
This widow lady? In her right we came,
Your tender kinsman and to choke his days
Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire,
Rebellion, flat rebellion!
To teach thee safety! thou art perjured too,
Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.
Who didst thou leave to tend his majesty?
For England, cousin, go:
KING JOHN dies
When I have said, make answer to us both.
If you think meet, this afternoon will post
Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect:
Enter PEMBROKE
As doth the fury of two desperate men
These eyes that never did nor never shall
But since you are a gentle convertite,
Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not!
To overbear it, and we are all well pleased,
A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair,
Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury,
If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,
My liege! my lord! but now a king, now thus.
I tore them from their bonds and cried aloud
In sooth, I would you were a little sick,
Behold, the French amazed vouchsafe a parle,
No, in good sooth: the fire is dead with grief,
Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose
I conjure thee but slowly, run more fast.
The suit which you demand is gone and dead:
Upon your stubborn usage of the pope,
For so he will'd it.
To swear, swears only not to be forsworn,
SCENE VI. An open place in the neighbourhood of Swinstead Abbey.
Peace! no more.
What since thou sworest is sworn against thyself
But for containing fire to harm mine eye.
Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
I know she is not, for this match made up
Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land:
Though all these English and their discipline
Who painfully with much expedient march
From forth this morsel of dead royalty,
And from his holiness use all your power
But God hath made her sin and her the plague
A fellow by the hand of nature mark'd,
For I must use thee.
And lay this Angiers even to the ground,
Possess'd with rumours, full of idle dreams,
And bitter shame hath spoil'd the sweet world's taste
To sound the purpose of all their hearts,
From whom hast thou this great commission, France,
And brought in matter that should feed this fire,
Where but by chance a silver drop hath fallen,
Lead me to the revolts of England here.
A noble temper dost thou show in this,
An if an angel should have come to me
Find liable to our crown and dignity,
Are led so grossly by this meddling priest,
Alarums. Enter KING JOHN and HUBERT
Upon a parchment, and against this fire
Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides
This murder had not come into my mind:
As doth a raven on a sick-fall'n beast,
What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms
Show boldness and aspiring confidence.
My tongue shall hush again this storm of war
Forego the easier.
So hot a speed with such advice disposed,
Here once again we sit, once again crown'd,
'Tis not the roundure of your old-faced walls
To win this easy match play'd for a crown?
Passing these flats, are taken by the tide,
And when my knightly stomach is sufficed,
Poictiers and Anjou, these five provinces,
O, let me have no subject enemies,
As to my ample hope was promised
How that ambitious Constance would not cease
Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change,
Religiously provokes. Be pleased then
And so am I, whether I smack or no,
I am amazed, methinks, and lose my way
I may not go without you to the kings.
With my vex'd spirits I cannot take a truce,
Than e'er the coward hand of France can win:
To train ten thousand English to their side,
Purchase corrupted pardon of a man,
Unkind remembrance! thou and eyeless night
In this hot trial, more than we of France,
He and his toothpick at my worship's mess,
And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out
Of that I doubt, as all men's children may.
I'll fill these dogged spies with false reports:
I will both hear and grant you your requests.
A strange beginning: 'borrow'd majesty!'
Than whereupon our weal, on you depending,
False blood to false blood join'd! gone to be friends!
For villany is not without such rheum,
And thou shalt be canonized, cardinal,
Shadowing their right under your wings of war:
Bear with me cousin, for I was amazed
With any long'd-for change or better state.
Cut off the sequence of posterity,
Though you and all the kings of Christendom
And cull'd these fiery spirits from the world,
Whom he hath used rather for sport than need
I have sworn to do it,
Against an oath: the truth thou art unsure
Do glue themselves in sociable grief,
Or if you will, to speak more properly,
It is our safety, and we must embrace
It is not so, thou hast misspoke, misheard:
And, by my troth, I think thou lovest me well.
My Lord Chatillon may from England bring,
This 'once again,' but that your highness pleased,
And shall these hands, so lately purged of blood,
We had a kind of light what would ensue:
Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand,
That, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins,
My crown I should give off? Even so I have:
And wild amazement hurries up and down
And let us in, your king, whose labour'd spirits,
Seeing ARTHUR
Be of good comfort, for the great supply
Right in thine eye. Away, my friends! New flight,
No, no, when Fortune means to men most good,
Doth he still rage?
Taking him apart
The king by me requests your presence straight.
Except this city now by us besieged,
Being urged at a time unseasonable.
The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,
For this down-trodden equity, we tread
How fares your majesty?
'Tis too respective and too sociable
From that supernal judge, that stirs good thoughts
Heaven knows, they were besmear'd and over-stain'd
Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
No longer than we well could wash our hands
To outlook conquest and to win renown
The aweless lion could not wage the fight,
And make a riot on the gentle brow
For thus his royalty doth speak in me.
O, lawful let it be
Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from thee.
Cousin, look not sad:
As now again to snatch our palm from palm,
Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love
But now I envy at their liberty,
Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down!
To whom with all submission, on my knee
So foul a sky clears not without a storm:
Who brought that letter from the cardinal?
Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,
Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart,
That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon,
Saving in dialogue of compliment,
I shall yield up my crown, let him be hang'd.
Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest
A friend. What art thou?
And knows not how to do it but with tears.
Sir Robert might have eat his part in me
Of your dear mother England, blush for shame,
If ever I remember to be holy,
My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence,
That can we not, but he that proves the king,
He hath a trick of Coeur-de-lion's face,
I can with ease translate it to my will,
The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs,
Gentle kinsman, go,
Your worth, your greatness and nobility.
I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith.
Good lords, although my will to give is living,
Nay, it is in a manner done already,
Bring them before me.
Come the three corners of the world in arms,
Cry, 'havoc!' kings, back to the stained field,
Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich.
Exit
That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge,
Is husband in my mouth! even for that name,
Alarums, excursions, retreat. Enter KING JOHN,  QUEEN ELINOR, ARTHUR, the BASTARD, HUBERT, and Lords
SCENE I. France. Before Angiers.
King John, this is the very sum of all,
Yet it shall come from me to do thee good.
Drawing his sword
An if thou hast the mettle of a king,
If I get down, and do not break my limbs,
Will not a calfs-skin stop that mouth of thine?
Good my mother, peace!
That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe
And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.
I faintly broke with thee of Arthur's death,
Young gentlemen would be as sad as night,
What he hath won, that hath he fortified:
It draws toward supper in conclusion so.
Have you the heart? When your head did but ache,
Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet?
And if not that, I bring you witnesses,
We for the worthiest hold the right from both.
If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
Thou canst not, cardinal, devise a name
Which, though I will not practise to deceive,
Will't not be?
And this his son, England was Geffrey's right
I'ld play incessantly upon these jades,
Set armed discord 'twixt these perjured kings!
Nor keep his princely heart from Richard's hand.
And find the inheritance of this poor child,
And those thy fears might have wrought fears in me:
A sceptre snatch'd with an unruly hand
There is a soul counts thee her creditor
Exeunt Executioners
And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail
Even to our ocean, to our great King John.
Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.
Thinking his voice an armed Englishman,
But that I am as well begot, my liege,--
Forwearied in this action of swift speed,
Where honourable rescue and defence
To understand a law, to know the meaning
Exeunt all but the BASTARD
Then, good my mother, let me know my father,
My life, my joy, my food, my all the world!
But this effusion of such manly drops,
And being rich, my virtue then shall be
And didst in signs again parley with sin,
And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure,
And from Pope Innocent the legate here,
And on our actions set the name of right
From this my hand, as holding of the pope
That I have room with Rome to curse awhile!
Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.
Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?
The which if he can prove, a' pops me out
And were our father and this son like him,
Married in league, coupled and linked together
And even there, methinks, an angel spake:
Like Amazons come tripping after drums,
Nor tempt the danger of my true defence,
Liker in feature to his father Geffrey
ACT I
Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
Submit thee, boy.
Exeunt
Perchance the cardinal cannot make your peace,
This fever, that hath troubled me so long,
SCENE III. Before the castle.
The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs,
Women and fools, break off your conference.
That I must die here and live hence by truth?
And cabby run on in obedience
That thou for truth givest out are landed here?
I am best pleased to be from such a deed.
The Dauphin rages at our very heels.
His marches are expedient to this town,
Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss,
But even this night, whose black contagious breath
This toil of ours should be a work of thine,
Enter the BASTARD and PETER of Pomfret
But they will quake and tremble all this day.
At your employment, at your service, sir,'
Father, I may not wish the fortune thine,
What, shall they seek the lion in his den,
That such an army could be drawn in France,
Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France
Be of good comfort, prince, for you are born
Their battering cannon charged to the mouths,
And looked upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.
Exit BIGOT
That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour?
Remember. Madam, fare you well:
If not complete of, say he is not she,
That greatness should so grossly offer it:
I find the people strangely fantasied,
Am I Rome's slave? What penny hath Rome borne,
Exeunt
And they are all about his majesty.
Exeunt
Without a tongue, using conceit alone,
O Lymoges! O Austria! thou dost shame
But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy,
Of Coeur-de-lion knighted in the field.
Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?
Would I might never stir from off this place,
Yet I am none: whose tongue soe'er speaks false,
Beyond the infinite and boundless reach
Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace:
For he that holds his kingdom holds the law,
That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death
And blessed shall he be that doth revolt
That all I see in you is worthy love,
Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.
Thou hast made me giddy
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
You hold too heinous a respect of grief.
But, mother, I am not sir Robert's son,
Before we will lay down our just-borne arms,
That doth not smack of observation,
Infortunate in nothing but in thee:
With these ill tidings.
To the disposing of the cardinal:
The deed, which both our tongues held vile to name.
For him, and in his right, we hold this town.
Who, having no external thing to lose
To these ill-tuned repetitions.
But I do love the favour and the form
And all that we upon this side the sea,
Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn,
And well shall you perceive how willingly
To any tongue, speak it of what it will.
Lest men should say 'Look, where three-farthings goes!'
I come, to learn how you have dealt for him,
Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit,
Son to the elder brother of this man,
To be more prince, as may be. You are sad.
Shall then my father's will be of no force
Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent
Can hide you from our messengers of war,
ACT II
But from her need.
That we shall stop her exclamation.
Do but hear me, sir.
I shall indue you with: meantime but ask
I muse your majesty doth seem so cold,
And stir them up against a mightier task.
No, I will speak.
And will not let me welcome this good news.
Look'st thou pale, France? do not let go thy hand.
Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
Away with me, all you whose souls abhor
For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.
To dispossess that child which is not his?
What men provided, what munition sent,
We hold our town for neither, yet for both.
As heartily as he is glad he hath him.
I have a kind soul that would give you thanks
haste before:
Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
Thy nephew and right royal sovereign.
My gracious liege, when that my father lived,
Your faithful subject I, a gentleman
That no supporter but the huge firm earth
To consummate this business happily.
The yearly course that brings this day about
I honour'd him, I loved him, and will weep
From forth the noise and rumour of the field,
What say these young ones? What say you my niece?
I have but this to say,
To fierce and bloody inclination.
The best I had, a princess wrought it me,
And instantly return with me again,
Go after him, for he perhaps shall need
Your breeches best may carry them.
This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish,
Meet in one line, and vast confusion waits,
And finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak,
Then feeling what small things are boisterous there,
But if you be afeard to hear the worst,
Drum beats
O me! my uncle's spirit is in these stones:
Where should he find it purer than in Blanch?
Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee.
I'll strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime,
From all direction, purpose, course, intent:
Of Lewis the Dauphin and that lovely maid:
Enter Attendants, and BIGOT, carrying KING JOHN in a chair
Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig:
When English measure backward their own ground
A wicked day, and not a holy day!
I do bequeath my faithful services
And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O,
In best appointment all our regiments.
My head with more ill news, for it is full.
Whither dost thou go?
I did not think the king so stored with friends.
By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st,
I, madam? no, I have no reason for it,
Courage and comfort! all shall yet go well.
What say'st thou, boy? look in the lady's face.
O, two such silver currents, when they join,
According to the fair play of the world,
Brother of England, how may we content
And wound her honour with this diffidence.
Than to be butcher of an innocent child.
And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings
Or, if it must stand still, let wives with child
Even at the crying of your nation's crow,
That faith would live again by death of need.
Lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross'd:
Peace, no more. Adieu.
That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch,
No bargains break that are not this day made:
The life, the right and truth of all this realm
Exeunt
May easily win a woman's. Ay, my mother,
But when it first did help to wound itself.
Without eyes, ears and harmful sound of words,
We do believe thee: and beshrew my soul
You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.
The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke,
And be no further harmful than in show.
Enough.
And if his name be George, I'll call him Peter,
Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums,
Preach some philosophy to make me mad,
And she again wants nothing, to name want,
Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn?
SCENE I. A room in a castle.
Three days before: but this from rumour's tongue
For all the treasure that thine uncle owes:
Between his purpose and his conscience,
And will you?
I would not have believed him,--no tongue but Hubert's.
Heaven guard my mother's honour and my land!
Or do you almost think, although you see,
By making many. O, it grieves my soul,
And thou, to be endeared to a king,
By heaven, Hubert, I am almost ashamed
Than thou and John in manners, being as like
I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee!
He is more patient
With swifter spleen than powder can enforce,
And once dispatch'd him in an embassy
The sums I have collected shall express.
With other princes that may best be spared,
For I do see the cruel pangs of death
Where heaven He knows how we shall answer him,
Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail
Exit
We know his handiwork: therefore, good mother,
Shall we, upon the footing of our land,
I would not care, I then would be content,
Re-enter HUBERT
Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France,
Than was his will to get me, as I think.
In right of Arthur do I claim of thee:
Was levied in the body of a land.
Thy foot to England's throne, and therefore mark.
How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?
Coldly embracing the discolour'd earth,
To dive like buckets in concealed wells,
With dreadful pomp of stout invasion!
Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
Stay yet, Lord Salisbury, I'll go with thee,
Showing a paper
The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope,
Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres,
O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye:
Both are alike, and both alike we like.
Be great in act, as you have been in thought,
This unhair'd sauciness and boyish troops,
I see a yielding in the looks of France,
And be a carrion monster like thyself:
To arms invasive? shall a beardless boy,
This gentle offer of the perilous time.
Come hither, little kinsman, hark, a word.
In titles, honours and promotions,
Ah, none but in this iron age would do it!
The legate of the pope hath been with me,
And warrant limited unto my tongue.
To smooth the ice, or add another hue
All merciless proceeding by these French
Yet I alone, alone do me oppose
How like you this wild counsel, mighty states?
Under whose conduct came those powers of France
This day of shame, oppression, perjury.
But, heaven be thank'd, it is but voluntary.
My heart hath melted at a lady's tears,
Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget
The breath of heaven has blown his spirit out
And I will kiss thy detestable bones
Can in this book of beauty read 'I love,'
I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts:
Fare you well: had you such a loss as I,
That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king
Good father cardinal, cry thou amen
All Kent hath yielded, nothing there holds out
Shall leave his native channel and o'erswell
Methinks I see this hurly all on foot:
Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce,
This union shall do more than battery can
The canon of the law is laid on him,
And part your mingled colours once again,
For France, for France, for it is more than need.
To England, if you will.
The king hath dispossess'd himself of us:
Counts it your weal he have his liberty.
But the word 'maid,' cheats the poor maid of that,
Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
But many a many foot of land the worse.
As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear
Arthur ta'en prisoner? divers dear friends slain?
With half that face would he have all my land:
Commend these waters to those baby eyes
Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course
Does show the mood of a much troubled breast,
This little abstract doth contain that large
The fearful difference of incensed kings:
In the vile prison of afflicted breath.
Why, here walk I in the black brow of night,
But, ass, I'll take that burthen from your back,
And he that stands upon a slippery place
Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose
Within the arras: when I strike my foot
But thou from loving England art so far,
Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.
And such as to my claim are liable,
The king of England, when we know the king.
Exit BASTARD
Though to no use but still to look on you!
Do in his name religiously demand
Indeed, I have been merrier.
With purpose presently to leave this war.
I shall not know him: therefore never, never
How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?
As she in beauty, education, blood,
For our advantage, therefore hear us first.
Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds
To your proceedings? do not seek to stuff
Arm you against your other enemies,
If old sir Robert did beget us both
Thou art a murderer.
The rites of marriage shall be solemnized.
To this fair island and the territories,
For your conversion. Now your traveller,
And let belief and life encounter so
So makest thou faith an enemy to faith,
May this be possible? may this be true?
Do as I bid you do.
That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,
Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee:
Or have you read or heard? or could you think?
Her injury the beadle to her sin,
Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet
By cutting off your heads: thus hath he sworn
Let it be so: I do commit his youth
Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back,
A chafed lion by the mortal paw,
How I have sped among the clergymen,
Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those provinces?
Command thy son and daughter to join hands.
The rather that you give his offspring life,
I say again, if Lewis do win the day,
The great metropolis and see of Rome:
O death, made proud with pure and princely beauty!
That to my home I will no more return,
O heaven! I thank you, Hubert.
Which holds but till thy news be uttered,
That is my brother's plea and none of mine,
To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
Enter LADY FAULCONBRIDGE and GURNEY
Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,
With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.
The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city:
With very easy arguments of love,
The enfranchisement of Arthur, whose restraint
Is scatter'd and disjoin'd from fellowship.
Deny their office: only you do lack
Stay for an answer to your embassy,
To our solemnity: I trust we shall,
And the conjunction of our inward souls
Nay, hear me, Hubert, drive these men away,
Son, list to this conjunction, make this match,
Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint.
Smacks it not something of the policy?
And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath
And by whose help I mean to chastise it.
As patches set upon a little breach
Hubert, away with him, imprison him,
I do suspect thee very grievously.
And king o'er him and all that he enjoys:
Indeed we heard how near his death he was
No, I defy all counsel, all redress,
O foul revolt of French inconstancy!
That borrow their behaviors from the great,
Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude.
And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much,
For that my grandsire was an Englishman,
And out of my dear love I'll give thee more
Some trumpet summon hither to the walls
Lo, now I now see the issue of your peace.
And happy newness, that intends old right.
Else what a mockery should it be to swear!
That undergo this charge? who else but I,
Govern the motion of a kingly eye:
Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs, Because--
What you would have reform'd that is not well,
Come forth.
From his allegiance to an heretic,
What follows if we disallow of this?
Your face hath got five hundred pound a year,
But with a heart full of unstained love:
So well, that what you bid me undertake,
And ready mounted are they to spit forth
And like an eagle o'er his aery towers,
Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost:
To stranger blood, to foreign royalty.
Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend
And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
O, well did he become that lion's robe
Of thine affairs, as well as thou of mine?
Is it as he will? well then, France shall rue.
The colour of the king doth come and go
The Dauphin is too wilful-opposite,
And like a bated and retired flood,
Why then I suck my teeth and catechise
To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
We'll lay before this town our royal bones,
This might have been prevented and made whole
It is too late: the life of all his blood
Or if he do, let it at least be said
To make a faithless error in your ears:
He is forsworn, if e'er those eyes of yours
With this same very iron to burn them out.
A noble boy! Who would not do thee right?
As loud as thine rattle the welkin's ear
Become thy great birth nor deserve a crown.
Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,
The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,
Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.
They saw we had a purpose of defence.
For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss
When I was got, I'll send his soul to hell.
And stand securely on their battlements,
The steps of wrong, should move you to mew up
Canonized and worshipped as a saint,
To say there is no vice but beggary.
And call it cunning: do, an if you will:
I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert.
That, having our fair order written down,
They swirl asunder and dismember me.
And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy
Lewis marry Blanch! O boy, then where art thou?
When there is such disorder in my wit.
Sirrah, look to't, i' faith, I will, i' faith.
Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?
Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
That broker, that still breaks the pate of faith,
To push destruction and perpetual shame
To our fast-closed gates, for at this match,
Out of his rags! Here's a large mouth, indeed,
What hath this day deserved? what hath it done,
If England to itself do rest but true.
By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,
We owe thee much! within this wall of flesh
Alack, thou dost usurp authority.
Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
Peace!
As dear be to thee as thy father was.
A mother's curse, on her revolting son.
Never to be infected with delight,
Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off,
Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge?
With all my heart I thank thee for my father!
To spread his colours, boy, in thy behalf,
That Geffrey was thy elder brother born,
Be stronger with thee than the name of wife?
To set a form upon that indigest
Sir Robert could do well: marry, to confess,
Good reverend father, make my person yours,
These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his:
With course disturb'd even thy confining shores,
The day shall not be up so soon as I,
And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts,
That's the curse of Rome.
Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias,
That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends,
The circle of my glory.
Look, who comes here! a grave unto a soul,
Retaining but a quantity of life,
It is a damned and a bloody work,
To whom he sung, in rude harsh-sounding rhymes,
Unless thou let his silver water keep
Doth by the idle comments that it makes
I have possess'd you with and think them strong,
Plead for our interest and our being here.
Of the old, feeble and day-wearied sun,
Swearing allegiance and the love of soul
Ugly and slanderous to thy mother's womb,
The iron of itself, though heat red-hot,
Come to thy grandam, child.
The practise and the purpose of the king:
There tell the king he may inquire us out.
To make room for him in my husband's bed:
Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so?
Enter AUSTRIA and forces, drums, etc. on one side:  on the other KING PHILIP and his power, LEWIS, ARTHUR, CONSTANCE and attendants
Since kings break faith upon commodity,
Commodity, the bias of the world,
England, for itself.
Madam, I would not wish a better father.
A passion hateful to my purposes,
Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured kings!
Have I not heard these islanders shout out
Yet speaks and peradventure may recover.
Turn face to face and bloody point to point,
A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.
And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust
Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded slave,
The very spirit of Plantagenet!
Welcome before the gates of Angiers, duke.
To save unscratch'd your city's threatened cheeks,
To do your pleasure and continue friends.
Enter KING JOHN, ARTHUR, and HUBERT
I would that I were low laid in my grave:
Envenom him with words, or get thee gone
To do the office for thee of revenge,
That water-walled bulwark, still secure
As little prince, having so great a title
If he see aught in you that makes him like,
This is the man should do the bloody deed,
Sticking together in calamity.
Made it no conscience to destroy a prince.
Between my conscience and my cousin's death.
Before the curing of a strong disease,
How wildly then walks my estate in France!
Shall tithe or toll in our dominions,
By our best eyes cannot be censured:
Shall give a holiness, a purity,
To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.
To this effect, before you were new crown'd,
He talks to me that never had a son.
As we to keep this city.
His soul and body to their lasting rest.
I am a soldier and now bound to France.
Upon thy stars, thy fortune and thy strength,
It lies as sightly on the back of him
Since I first call'd my brother's father dad.
That were embattailed and rank'd in Kent:
And Earl of Richmond, and this rich fair town
They say King John sore sick hath left the field.
With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news,
There is no sure foundation set on blood,
And will again commit them to their bonds,
Let kings assemble, for my grief's so great
And, to his shape, were heir to all this land,
By giving it the worship of revenge.
Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care,
Well then, to work: our cannon shall be bent
Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!
Teach us some fence!
That sways the earth this climate overlooks,
Who art thou?
Against these giddy loose suggestions:
And brings from him such offers of our peace
Upon thy feature, for my rage was blind,
It is the curse of kings to be attended
Fresh expectation troubled not the land
And so ingrateful, you deny me that.
Give with our niece a dowry large enough:
Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp?
Salute thee for her king: till then, fair boy,
To charge me to an answer, as the pope.
How now, foolish rheum!
A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,
Acknowledge then the king, and let me in.
From a resolved and honourable war,
Thou odouriferous stench! sound rottenness!
With slaughter's pencil, where revenge did paint
Trumpet sounds. Enter certain Citizens upon the walls
Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,
I, by the honour of my marriage-bed,
Will give her sadness very little cure.
What art thou?
There's few or none do know me: if they did,
On this removed issue, plague for her
No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.
Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France,
To say what good respect I have of thee.
I had a thing to say, but let it go:
By some damn'd hand was robb'd and ta'en away.
Patch'd with foul moles and eye-offending marks,
Murder, as hating what himself hath done,
That so stood out against the holy church,
Exeunt HUBERT with PETER
And would not harm me.
And this is Geffrey's: in the name of God
For your fair safety, so, I kiss your hand.
As I upon advantage did remove,
That judge hath made me guardian to this boy:
When I spake darkly what I purposed,
That here come sacrifices for the field:
Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!
And make fair weather in your blustering land.
I do protest I never loved myself
What can go well, when we have run so ill?
With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,
Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.
This is the prison. What is he lies here?
Stand in his face to contradict his claim.
War! war! no peace! peace is to me a war
I from the north.
Found it too precious-princely for a grave.
This England never did, nor never shall,
And so he'll die, and, rising so again,
You came not of one mother then, it seems.
O, be removed from him, and answer well!
Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?
Exeunt
Their armours, that march'd hence so silver-bright,
From whose obedience I forbid my soul,
But you at your sick service had a prince.
Put but a little water in a spoon,
I warrant I love you more than you do me.
O my gentle cousin,
All punish'd in the person of this child,
Being an ordinary inundation,
That need must needs infer this principle,
Do I shrink up.
What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove!
Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?
Legitimation, name and all is gone:
Both for myself and them, but, chief of all,
We coldly pause for thee, Chatillon, speak.
To cudgel you and make you take the hatch,
I did suppose it should be on constraint:
Apt, liable to be employ'd in danger,
This expedition's charge.
The copy of your speed is learn'd by them,
Himself love's traitor: this is pity now,
And then we shall repent each drop of blood
When this was now a king, and now is clay?
That did disrobe the lion of that robe!
Our souls religiously confirm thy words.
King John, your king and England's doth approach,
To whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms,
He gives the bastinado with his tongue:
Against mine uncle.
Come, boy, prepare yourself.
My bed was ever to thy son as true
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale
Thrust but these men away, and I'll forgive you,
Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin,
And bloody England into England gone,
That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about,
Alarums, excursions. Enter the BASTARD, with AUSTRIA'S head
In peace, and part this body and my soul
I left him almost speechless, and broke out
It seems you know not, then, so much as we:
His honour: O, thine honour, Lewis, thine honour!
Till my attempt so much be glorified
O Lewis, stand fast! the devil tempts thee here
My reverend father, let it not be so!
And ring these fingers with thy household worms
Our cannons' malice vainly shall be spent
Nay, you may think my love was crafty love
Here is your hand and seal for what I did.
And in their rage, I having hold of both,
Even till that utmost corner of the west
Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold,
So hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath
In undetermined differences of kings.
To draw my answer from thy articles?
Dear amity and everlasting love.
Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
ACT IV
The foul corruption of a sweet child's death.
A whole armado of convicted sail
Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up
Her presence would have interrupted much:
That she is bound in honour still to do
A wonder, lady! lo, upon thy wish,
King Richard Coeur-de-lion was thy father:
Doth make an earthquake of nobility.
But when her humorous ladyship is by
Throw this report on their incensed rage,
Here after excursions, enter the Herald of France, with trumpets, to the gates
Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,
Why thou against the church, our holy mother,
The image of a wicked heinous fault
To make a more requital to your love!
As dim and meagre as an ague's fit,
Than I have named! The bastard Faulconbridge
To guard a title that was rich before,
Of stern injustice and confused wrong.
To look into the blots and stains of right:
Which being but the shadow of your son,
But thou shalt have, and creep time ne'er so slow,
And you have slander'd nature in my form,
Were born to see so sad an hour as this,
Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow.
Saying, 'What lack you?' and 'Where lies your grief?'
As bid me tell my tale in express words,
And your supply, which you have wish'd so long,
Yet, I remember, when I was in France,
I have a king's oath to the contrary.
With this abundance of superfluous breath?
Doth not the crown of England prove the king?
As good to die and go, as die and stay.
Then, by the lawful power that I have,
Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen's blood,
And your lips too, for I am well assured
On this Ascension-day, remember well,
Which died in Geffrey, and the hand of time
Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs.
Young lad, come forth, I have to say with you.
Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
Seats herself on the ground
Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury,
Patience, good lady! comfort, gentle Constance!
Brother, take you my land, I'll take my chance.
The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
Our discontented counties do revolt,
Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth:
So I were out of prison and kept sheep,
Now powers from home and discontents at home
Being wronged as we are by this peevish town,
Not till I sheathe it in a murderer's skin.
And make a monster of you.
Good leave, good Philip.
Sound but another, and another shall
And others more, going to seek the grave
To enter conquerors and to proclaim
I am much bounden to your majesty.
As true as I believe you think them false
In the large composition of this man?
My uncle practises more harm to me:
What should he say, but as the cardinal?
Fellow, be gone: I cannot brook thy sight:
I idly heard, if true or false I know not.
My liege, her ear
What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?
Thy now unsured assurance to the crown,
Exeunt
Outside or inside, I will not return
France friend with England, what becomes of me?
Devoured by the unexpected flood.
Where be your powers? show now your mended faiths,
'O sir,' says answer, 'at your best command,
There's law and warrant, lady, for my curse.
O, what a noble combat hast thou fought
To feast upon whole thousands of the French.
Come, come, sans compliment, what news abroad?
His little kingdom of a forced grave.
Exeunt CHATILLON and PEMBROKE
Out-faced infant state and done a rape
My father's land, as was my father's will.
Two long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet.
That ever spider twisted from her womb
Against whose fury and unmatched force
Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
That was expected by the Dauphin here,
Your highness should deliver up your crown.
To treat of high affairs touching that time.
And module of confounded royalty.
When such profound respects do pull you on.
I would set an ox-head to your lion's hide,
I put you o'er to heaven and to my mother:
If that young Arthur be not gone already,
I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.
Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.
Shall find but bloody safety and untrue.
'Vive le roi!' as I have bank'd their towns?
[Aside]  His words do take possession of my bosom.
What craker is this same that deafs our ears
My arms such eel-skins stuff'd, my face so thin
While Philip breathes.
Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads,
Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,
Lord Bigot, I am none.
As we will ours, against these saucy walls,
To hang thee on, or wouldst thou drown thyself,
The next is this, King John hath reconciled
Which was so strongly urged past my defence.
What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?
Left to be finished by such as she,
Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge,
Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
And I'll keep him so,
O, that my tongue were in the thunder's mouth!
But hold himself safe in his prisonment.
Once more to-day well met, distemper'd lords!
That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks:
With all religious strength of sacred vows,
As rain to water, or devil to his dam.
Sirrah, your brother is legitimate,
Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France,
To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.
Like rivers of remorse and innocency.
'Tis France, for England.
And sullen presage of your own decay.
With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
No certain life achieved by others' death.
With him along is come the mother-queen,
The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords
Thy hateful life.
Why answer not the double majesties
Making that idiot, laughter, keep men's eyes
There's a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.
In faint retire. O, bravely came we off,
Our griefs, and not our manners, reason now.
If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
Under the tide: but now I breathe again
Where is my prince, the Dauphin?
A bare-ribb'd death, whose office is this day
Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet,
Is it sir Robert's son that you seek so?
Which is the side that I must go withal?
It may lie gently at the foot of peace,
Take again
This day, all things begun come to ill end,
Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win,
What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
A voluntary zeal and an unurged faith
And quench his fiery indignation
So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
For I am stifled with this smell of sin.
In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake
Let them be welcome then: we are prepared.
Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal
And tell me how you would bestow yourself.
And in the last repeating troublesome,
Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue,
How I may be deliver'd of these woes,
This inundation of mistemper'd humour
No scope of nature, no distemper'd day,
I will instruct my sorrows to be proud,
My holy lord of Milan, from the king
Out, dunghill! darest thou brave a nobleman?
Amen, amen! Mount, chevaliers! to arms!
Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge!
All things that you should use to do me wrong
Our country manners give our betters way.
To do him justice and revenge on you.
Whilst he that hears makes fearful action,
Told of a many thousand warlike French
And call them meteors, prodigies and signs,
Strike up the drums, and let the tongue of war
Exampled by this heinous spectacle.
If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin:
As faithfully as I deny the devil.
We will attend to neither.
This harness'd masque and unadvised revel,
Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
And whisper one another in the ear,
King Philip, listen to the cardinal.
Out of the weak door of our fainting land.
Whi ch, in their throng and press to that last hold,
Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him,
And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
Among the high tides in the calendar?
And victory, with little loss, doth play
At your industrious scenes and acts of death.
Why, know you not? the lords are all come back,
And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue,
Brief, then, and what's the news?
Of all his people shall revolt from him
Of all his people and freeze up their zeal,
We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance,
We like not this, thou dost forget thyself.
You loving men of Angiers, Arthur's subjects,
As we with honour and respect may take,
Is as a fiend confined to tyrannize
Did nearer float upon the swelling tide,
Of that fell poison which assaileth him.
Do, child, go to it grandam, child:
Ay, who doubts that? a will! a wicked will:
Enter English Herald, with trumpet
Had of your father claim'd this son for his?
By this time from their fixed beds of lime
The blood, and dearest-valued blood, of France.
O, when the last account 'twixt heaven and earth
Out of one side her happy minion,
For England go: I will whet on the king.
The sun of heaven methought was loath to set,
I'll stir them to it. Come, away, away!
Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well
I am not glad that such a sore of time
He is prepared, and reason too he should:
And like the watchful minutes to the hour,
Come, come, for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep
From henceforth bear his name whose form thou bear'st:
I could give better comfort than you do.
To a most base and vile-concluded peace.
Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.
There is no malice in this burning coal,
The accent of his tongue affecteth him.
Something about, a little from the right,
Shall wait upon your father's funeral.
That, being brought into the open air,
He flatly says he'll not lay down his arms.
For I am sick and capable of fears,
In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits
But on, my liege, for very little pains
That any thing he sees, which moves his liking,
Rising
And I will sit as quiet as a lamb,
Return the precedent to these lords again,
What woman-post is this? hath she no husband
Save what is opposite to England's love.
Nor look upon the iron angerly:
Foretell the ending of mortality.
Do you not read some tokens of my son
Talks as familiarly of roaring lions
I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal,
They do confound their skill in covetousness,
Which harm within itself so heinous is
Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes,
By all the blood that ever fury breathed,
As it on earth hath been thy servant still.
Bethink you, father, for the difference
He will awake my mercy which lies dead:
Who are at hand, triumphantly display'd,
But thou didst understand me by my signs
How did he take it? who did taste to him?
Bedlam, have done.
I like it well. France, shall we knit our powers
Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts
And she a fair divided excellence,
And but for our approach those sleeping stones,
We breathed our counsel: but it pleased your highness
Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you:
Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up:
And that high royalty was ne'er pluck'd off,
It would allay the burning quality
The dominations, royalties and rights
Who dares not stir by day must walk by night,
The faiths of men ne'er stained with revolt,
Are wreck'd three nights ago on Goodwin Sands.
That present medicine must be minister'd,
Or, when he doom'd this beauty to a grave,
England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
For if the French be lords of this loud day,
Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth,
Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts
No: know the gallant monarch is in arms
The imminent decay of wrested pomp.
For courage mounteth with occasion:
Be by some certain king purged and deposed.
Is warlike John, and in his forehead sits
But this one word, whether thy tale be true.
To grace occasions, let it be our suit
Because my poor child is a prisoner.
Gone to be married! gone to swear a peace!
Then tell us, shall your city call us lord,
And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist,
Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear:
With many legions of strange fantasies,
To cull the plots of best advantages:
He tells us Arthur is deceased to-night.
That we, the sons and children of this isle,
If Lewis by your assistance win the day.
Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent us here!
At our importance hither is he come,
Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong,
As many and as well-born bloods as those,--
Let me not hold my tongue, let me not, Hubert,
All form is formless, order orderless,
SCENE II. KING JOHN'S palace.
And, like a shifted wind unto a sail,
This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word,
To thrust his icy fingers in my maw,
Art thou damn'd, Hubert.
Enter a Messenger
If thou didst but consent
The salt in them is hot.
Exit
Rejoice, you men of Angiers, ring your bells:
'Tis true, fair daughter, and this blessed day
Nay, but make haste, the better foot before.
Shall never see it but a holiday.
Where how he did prevail I shame to speak,
To grace the gentry of a land remote,
Out of the path which shall directly lead
Here comes the holy legate of the pope.
And this, so sole and so unmatchable,
Make deeds ill done! Hadst not thou been by,
But thou hast sworn against religion,
Within the scorched veins of one new-burn'd.
Exeunt
Five moons!
As they have given these hairs their liberty!'
My liege, here is the strangest controversy
As Lewis himself: so, nobles, shall you all,
Know him in us, that here hold up his right.
And teaches me to kill or hang myself:
And I have made a happy peace with him,
Who thou wilt: and if thou please,
Indeed we fear'd his sickness was past cure.
Call for our chiefest men of discipline,
And he will look as hollow as a ghost,
With ladies' faces and fierce dragons' spleens,
Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,
A woman's will, a canker'd grandam's will!
Or turn'd an eye of doubt upon my face,
France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,
To speak unto this city: what say you?
Hail, noble prince of France!
To that owes it, namely this young prince:
As it makes harmful all that speak of it.
Turning with splendor of his precious eye
Ay me! this tyrant fever burns me up,
Nor conversant with ease and idleness,
Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.
Make such unconstant children of ourselves,
Which owe the crown that thou o'ermasterest?
What may be wrought out of their discontent,
And send him word by me which way you go.
That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.
Philip, good old sir Robert's wife's eldest son.
Is not amiss when it is truly done,
He shall not live.
He is afraid of me and I of him:
A grave.
Who in that sale sells pardon from himself,
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye!
And all the unsettled humours of the land,
Is yet the cover of a fairer mind
Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room,
To souse annoyance that comes near his nest.
But for the certain knowledge of that truth
Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think
Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house,
In at the window, or else o'er the hatch:
This apish and unmannerly approach,
Then with a passion would I shake the world,
Forethought by heaven!
And great affections wrestling in thy bosom
Were in the Washes all unwarily
As I have heard my father speak himself,
If what in rest you have in right you hold,
The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.
And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear,
What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?
Even at that news he dies, and then the hearts
To throw a perfume on the violet,
To underprop this action? Is't not I
It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand,
Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
O tremble, for you hear the lion roar.
Your noble mother: and, as I hear, my lord,
Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse,
Thou hast a perfect thought:
Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed
Your grace shall pardon me, I will not back:
And fly like thought from them to me again.
Many a widow's husband grovelling lies,
An echo with the clamour of thy drum,
Let it be so: and you, my noble prince,
There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell
Thou art not holy to belie me so,
O, let us pay the time but needful woe,
But, ah, I will not! yet I love thee well,
Through my burn'd bosom, nor entreat the north
Enter the BASTARD
In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.
And hang a calf's-skin on his recreant limbs.
For then I should not love thee, no, nor thou
This, in our foresaid holy father's name,
Do not prove me so,
To find you out.
And like a dog that is compell'd to fight,
It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven
The little number of your doubtful friends.
Here have we war for war and blood for blood,
Is niece to England: look upon the years
Brother, adieu: good fortune come to thee!
That you shall think the devil is come from hell.
And bear possession of our person here,
Madam, I'll follow you unto the death.
To him that did but yesterday suspire,
Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form,
To give me audience: if the midnight bell
Bend their best studies, heartily request
Fast to the chair: be heedful: hence, and watch.
With contemplation and devout desires.
Like heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set:
Than this, that nothing do I see in you,
If thou stand excommunicate and cursed?
And buss thee as thy wife. Misery's love,
How green you are and fresh in this old world!
The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.
Of Canterbury, from that holy see?
And I am I, howe'er I was begot.
What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?
Confronts your city's eyes, your winking gates,
Brother by the mother's side, give me your hand:
Second a villain and a murderer?
They found him dead and cast into the streets,
Have brought a countercheque before your gates,
And happily may your sweet self put on
One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.
And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did.
Where is that slave, thy brother? where is he,
The youth says well. Now hear our English king,
Hadst thou but shook thy head or made a pause
The graceless action of a heavy hand,
And spleen of speed to see your majesty!
And will not temporize with my entreaties,
Heat me these irons hot, and look thou stand
Wounded to death.
Or add a royal number to the dead,
That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks?
When gold and silver becks me to come on.
The wall is high, and yet will I leap down:
Is this your promise? go to, hold your tongue.
SCENE I. KING JOHN'S palace.
And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
For thou wast got i' the way of honesty.
Mercy on me!
Now for the bare-pick'd bone of majesty
Our abbeys and our priories shall pay
Not that I have the power to clutch my hand,
Last in the field, and almost lords of it!
When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!
O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,
Therefore thy later vows against thy first
Subjected tribute to commanding love,
And on that day at noon whereon he says
Being no further enemy to you
But I will fit it with some better time.
O that there were some virtue in my tears,
The borrow'd majesty, of England here.
And France, whose armour conscience buckled on,
A cocker'd silken wanton, brave our fields,
Mine eye hath well examined his parts
And in the mean time sojourn'd at my father's,
Enter KING JOHN, CARDINAL PANDULPH, and Attendants
And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread
Which cannot hear a lady's feeble voice,
Farewell, gentle cousin.
Let in that amity which you have made,
Of hoarding abbots, imprisoned angels
For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop.
She looks upon them with a threatening eye.
Command the rest to stand. God and our right!
Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
No natural exhalation in the sky,
And kiss the lips of unacquainted change
And with a great heart heave away the storm:
With all my heart, my liege.
Father, to arms!
Much work for tears in many an English mother,
Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends
Hath willingly departed with a part,
And have is have, however men do catch:
The unowed interest of proud-swelling state.
So thrive it in your game! and so, farewell.
Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?
Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
Old men and beldams in the streets
To thee, King John, my holy errand is.
I like thee well: wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
What is thy name?
In the fair multitude of those her hairs!
Exeunt all but BASTARD
Forgive the comment that my passion made
Were harbour'd in their rude circumference.
Your brother did employ my father much,--
To make hazard of new fortunes here:
What! I am dubb'd! I have it on my shoulder.
I'll find a thousand shifts to get away:
Is to mistake again, though indirect,
Enter CARDINAL PANDULPH
One that will play the devil, sir, with you,
That smooth-faced gentleman, tickling Commodity,
Who kill'd this prince?
Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
Quoted and sign'd to do a deed of shame,
To these two princes, if you marry them.
O fair affliction, peace!
Now these her princes are come home again,
Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.
Among the thorns and dangers of this world.
In dreadful trial of our kingdom's king!
Leave them as naked as the vulgar air.
For at Saint Mary's chapel presently
In such a just and charitable war.
There was not such a gracious creature born.
Some bastards too.
The Lady Constance in a frenzy died
So slight, unworthy and ridiculous,
Mark, how they whisper: urge them while their souls
Offending charity: if but a dozen French
Exit
To break within the bloody house of life,
The shadow of myself form'd in her eye:
Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate.
O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up,
ACT V
Hath put himself in arms: the adverse winds,
But thou dost swear only to be forsworn,
And mock the deep-mouth'd thunder: for at hand,
Can task the free breath of a sacred king?
Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England
Into the purse of rich prosperity
And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
Zounds! I was never so bethump'd with words
Withhold thine indignation, mighty heaven,
And breathing to his breathless excellence
Exeunt
Being but the second generation
And though thou now confess thou didst but jest,
The interruption of their churlish drums
Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes:
Nature and Fortune join'd to make thee great:
With barbarous ignorance and deny his youth
Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes,
Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.
I will not keep this form upon my head,
You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects--
The king doth smile at, and is well prepared
I will not stir, nor wince, nor speak a word,
And dost thou now fall over to my fores?
Sweat in this business and maintain this war?
And with my hand at midnight held your head,
Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love,
To try the fair adventure of to-morrow.
The king is moved, and answers not to this.
Who says it was, he lies, I say 'twas not.
Whose private with me of the Dauphin's love
His passion is so ripe, it needs must break.
To this unlook'd for, unprepared pomp.
Presented thee more hideous than thou art.
To make a shaking fever in your walls,
Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light
Or the reputed son of Coeur-de-lion,
But that your royal pleasure must be done,
Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought,
Enter LEWIS and his train
The Count Melun is slain, the English lords
Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
So I may keep mine eyes: O, spare mine eyes.
That never saw the giant world enraged,
Cool and congeal again to what it was.
And leave your children, wives and you in peace.
Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.
But as we, under heaven, are supreme head,
He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
That John may stand, then Arthur needs must fall,
Set on toward Swinstead: to my litter straight,
And not alone in habit and device,
Of thy unnatural uncle, English John:
My brother Robert? old sir Robert's son?
The farthest limit of my embassy.
Exeunt
By heaven, I would do it.
Of any kindred action like to this?
A fearful eye thou hast: where is that blood
He hath a stern look, but a gentle heart:
In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept
In that behalf which we have challenged it?
Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes?
And oftentimes excusing of a fault
Led by the Dauphin.
Go with me to the king: 'tis wonderful
Peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate:
Young boy, I must.
Giving the crown
Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
Though you and all the rest so grossly led
And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
Together with that pale, that white-faced shore,
Full of warm blood, of mirth, of gossiping.
'O that these hands could so redeem my son,
Are you sick, Hubert? you look pale to-day:
Rests by you only to be qualified:
Here's a stay
The Dauphin is preparing hitherward,
Till now infixed I beheld myself
Thou art more deep damn'd than Prince Lucifer:
That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John!
Therefore, to be possess'd with double pomp,
O, now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel,
should sing.
But what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall?
And follow unacquainted colours here?
Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine,
To give us warrant from the hand of heaven
Silence, no more: go closely in with me:
Have hither march'd to your endamagement:
In sooth he might, then, if he were my brother's,
No more than he that threats. To arms let's hie!
O, he is old and blushes not at death.
Near or far off, well won is still well shot,
Death, having prey'd upon the outward parts,
And keep it safe for our remembrance:
Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
Some gentle order, and then we shall be blest
Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives,
I am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen
Then pause not, for the present time's so sick,
Paying the fine of rated treachery
Awakes my conscience to confess all this.
Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?
But on the sight of us your lawful king,
For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising.
Enter CONSTANCE, ARTHUR, and SALISBURY
Thou art the issue of my dear offence,
Now, what says the world
Lewis, determine what we shall do straight.
Your royal presences be ruled by me:
Let not the hours of this ungodly day
There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made
Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself,
You are as fond of grief as of your child.
How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.
We will not line his thin bestained cloak
Peace be to France, if France in peace permit
This act so evilly born shall cool the hearts
With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.
Who by the hand of France this day hath made
Poison'd,--ill fare--dead, forsook, cast off:
Enter HUBERT
By slaves that take their humours for a warrant
Abortives, presages and tongues of heaven,
Than when you left him, even now he sung.
His forces strong, his soldiers confident.
Do not I know thou wouldst?
O fair return of banish'd majesty!
Have I commandment on the pulse of life?
Since I must lose the use of all deceit?
Thus, leaning on mine elbow, I begin,
Whose fulness of perfection lies in him.
Dyed in the dying slaughter of their foes:
You men of Angiers, open wide your gates,
Enter HUBERT
Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France?
Already smokes about the burning crest
A monk, I tell you, a resolved villain,
That we shall see and know our friends in heaven:
France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.
This must be answer'd either here or hence.
Both they and we, perusing o'er these notes,
Thy rage sham burn thee up, and thou shalt turn
To land his legions all as soon as I,
Upon thy wedding-day?
With eyes as red as new-enkindled fire,
Enter HUBERT and Executioners
But now will canker-sorrow eat my bud
There stuck no plume in any English crest
Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death,
For he that steeps his safety in true blood
And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men,
Doth make the fault the worse by the excuse,
Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch?
Have I not here the best cards for the game,
To break into this dangerous argument,--
Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye
Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,
Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin,
What the devil art thou?
What doth move you to claim your brother's land?
Enter PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and BIGOT
If love ambitious sought a match of birth,
My mother is assailed in our tent,
James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile?
We'll put thee down, 'gainst whom these arms we bear,
May then make all the claim that Arthur did.
Upon the right and party of her son?
'Good den, sir Richard!'--'God-a-mercy, fellow!'--
At your den, sirrah, with your lioness
Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
Away, and glister like the god of war,
Now keep your holy word: go meet the French,
Who is it that hath warn'd us to the walls?
Upon your oath of service to the pope,
Upon which better part our prayers come in,
Mocking the air with colours idly spread,
Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arrived?
Speak on with favour, we are bent to hear.
When we were happy we had other names.
And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags
The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.
My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulconbridge,
But there is little reason in your grief,
Out on thee, rude man! thou dost shame thy mother
England we love, and for that England's sake
Discredit more in hiding of the fault
But if you fondly pass our proffer'd offer,
For even the breath of what I mean to speak
Now that their souls are topful of offence.
And put these same into young Arthur's hand,
On their departure most of all show evil:
She is sad and passionate at your highness' tent.
Enter MELUN, wounded
Against the pope and count his friends my foes.
O, where hath our intelligence been drunk?
Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone
Some messenger betwixt me and the peers,
What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side!
I leave your highness. Grandam, I will pray,
By east and west let France and England mount
Indeed your drums, being beaten, will cry out,
Should 'scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.
Your safety, for the which myself and them
To solemnize this day the glorious sun
Many a poor man's son would have lien still
Sits on his horseback at mine hostess' door,
Enter CARDINAL PANDULPH
Bind up your hairs.
Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss
There's toys abroad: anon I'll tell thee more.
Is it my fault that I was Geffrey's son?
Whispers with BLANCH
Death.
They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke,
Which bleeds away, even as a form of wax
Some speedy messenger bid her repair
To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him.
The thunder of my cannon shall be heard:
Than did the fault before it was so patch'd.
O heaven, that there were but a mote in yours,
With all true duty. On toward Calais, ho!
Philip! sparrow: James,
I am no woman, I'll not swoon at it.
Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great,
Say that before Ascension-day at noon
So much as frown on you.
Of this oppressed boy: this is thy eld'st son's son,
Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
In brief, we are the king of England's subjects:
When workmen strive to do better than well,
'Tis not an hour since I left him well:
But for because he hath not woo'd me yet:
Exeunt Lords
And better conquest never canst thou make
An if you do, you will but make it blush
Proves valueless: you are forsworn, forsworn,
Lives in his eye, that close aspect of his
Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.
To lie like pawns lock'd up in chests and trunks,
I would not have you, lord, forget yourself,
Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind
Do glorify the banks that bound them in,
My lord--
Lord of thy presence and no land beside?
As great Alcides' shows upon an ass:
To do offence and scath in Christendom.
And I shall show you peace and fair-faced league,
When I was got, sir Robert was away!
This sway of motion, this Commodity,
Strength match'd with strength, and power confronted power:
By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours:
Philip, my liege, so is my name begun,
Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,
It is the Count Melun.
To stop their marches 'fore we are inflamed.
Exeunt
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!--
He is the half part of a blessed man,
Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard,
A thousand businesses are brief in hand,
And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul.
My mother's son did get your father's heir,
So newly join'd in love, so strong in both,
That thou mayst be a queen, and cheque the world!
Not trusting to this halting legate here,
Commend me to one Hubert with your king:
Unless he do submit himself to Rome.
A greater power then we denies all this,
And tempt us not to bear above our power!
That you have bid us ask his liberty,
Have I not pawn'd to you my majesty?
We will untread the steps of damned flight,
SCENE III. The field of battle.
After young Arthur, claim this land for mine,
But buffets better than a fist of France:
That done, dissever your united strengths,
All days of glory, joy and happiness.
And if my legs were two such riding-rods,
That ever wall-eyed wrath or staring rage
That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,
His lands to me, and took it on his death
Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town:
The better arm you to the sudden time,
Let him come back, that his compassion may
Only for wantonness. By my christendom,
And I had his, sir Robert's his, like him,
I fear some outrage, and I'll follow her.
If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill,
Now happy he whose cloak and cincture can
Is now in England, ransacking the church,
That did display them when we first march'd forth,
And with hot irons must I burn them out.
I'll tell tree, Hubert, half my power this night,
Withhold thy speed, dreadful occasion!
His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me?
The incense of a vow, a holy vow,
Return and tell him so: we know the worst.
To rest without a spot for evermore.
The angry lords with all expedient haste.
Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?
Thou little valiant, great in villany!
Where these two Christian armies might combine
What other harm have I, good lady, done,
And now, instead of bullets wrapp'd in fire,
So under Him that great supremacy,
And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace:
Why then defy each other and pell-mell
But from the inward motion to deliver
And makest an oath the surety for thy truth
Thy hand hath murder'd him: I had a mighty cause
Away before: conduct me to the king,
Of soft petitions, pity and remorse,
As this hath made me. Who was he that said
If want it be not that she is not he:
My lord?
Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell.
To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
Speak, citizens, for England, who's your king?
Snatch at his master that doth tarre him on.
To my keen curses, for without my wrong
Exit
And wound our tattering colours clearly up,
And if she did play false, the fault was hers,
And consequently thy rude hand to act
Are turned to one thread, one little hair:
And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,
Here's a good world! Knew you of this fair work?
If that it be the work of any hand!
I do, my lord, and in her eye I find
We hold our time too precious to be spent
I am not mad, too well, too well I feel
That give you cause to prove my saying true.
First made to heaven, first be to heaven perform'd,
The sun's o'ercast with blood: fair day, adieu!
Out of my sight, and never see me more!
But spoke the harm that is by others done?
Even in the jaws of danger and of death.
Which in the very meeting fall and die.
That daily break-vow, he that wins of all,
Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.
That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.
Thou art his keeper.
Must by the hungry now be fed upon:
Between our kingdoms and our royal selves,
Your vile intent must needs seem horrible.
Well could I bear that England had this praise,
Some proper man, I hope: who was it, mother?
It cannot be, thou dost but say 'tis so:
The advantage of his absence took the king
The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,
This friendly treaty of our threaten'd town?
Go we, as well as haste will suffer us,
In their continuance will not feel themselves.
All murders past do stand excused in this:
Say, shall the current of our right run on?
I am not worth this coil that's made for me.
The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
This news hath made thee a most ugly man.
And, father cardinal, I have heard you say
Hostility and civil tumult reigns
And pours down mischief. Austria's head lie there,
Or shall we give the signal to our rage
Thou shalt be punish'd for thus frighting me,
I'll make a peace between your soul and you.
And so doth yours, your fault was not your folly:
Till I have set a glory to this hand,
So, by a roaring tempest on the flood,
Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,
That villain Hubert told me he did live.
Show me the very wound of this ill news:
Well, see to live, I will not touch thine eye
Even in the matter of mine innocence,
But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
Makes sound opinion sick and truth suspected,
Philip, what say'st thou to the cardinal?
You look but on the outside of this work.
Her enemies' ranks,--I must withdraw and weep
A rage whose heat hath this condition,
Is but the vain breath of a common man:
As thine was to thy husband, and this boy
So we could find some pattern of our shame.
O, upon my knee,
O, answer not, but to my closet bring
Between this chastised kingdom and myself,
My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night,
And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows
O, come to me!
Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth:
Use our commission in his utmost force.
And the like tender of our love we make,
Re-enter KING JOHN and KING PHILIP, with their powers, severally
Was once superfluous: you were crown'd before,
Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,
[To the BASTARD]  Cousin, away for England!
And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes,
Ha! I'll tell thee what,
And, noble Dauphin, albeit we swear
I knit my handercher about your brows,
And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.
Of both your armies, whose equality
Coz, farewell.
To pay that duty which you truly owe
How easy dost thou take all England up!
That is removed by a staff of France,
But stay'd and made the western welkin blush,
Exeunt
Where we do reign, we will alone uphold,
Well, keep good quarter and good care to-night:
O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,
Resembling majesty, which, being touch'd and tried,
Think you I bear the shears of destiny?
These flags of France, that are advanced here
And may not be performed by thyself,
And raise the power of France upon his head,
My picked man of countries: 'My dear sir,'
For bloody power to rush upon your peace.
And stalk in blood to our possession?
Hear us, great kings: vouchsafe awhile to stay,
Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?
To Ireland, Poictiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
Our colours do return in those same hands
It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.
Thy grandam loves thee, and thy uncle will
Let me wipe off this honourable dew,
Doth make a stand at what your highness will.
With them a bastard of the king's deceased,
Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
Hubert, I think?
But this is worshipful society
What brings you here to court so hastily?
I would not be sir Nob in any case.
And, O, what better matter breeds for you
And brought Prince Henry in their company,
Of plain old form is much disfigured,
My father gave me honour, yours gave land.
So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,
To any sovereign state throughout the world.
An empty casket, where the jewel of life
This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet,
To this most cruel act, do but despair,
Look here upon thy brother Geffrey's face,
In this which he accounts so clearly won:
And till it be undoubted, we do lock
Is fled to heaven, and England now is left
As thou shalt be, if thou didst kill this child.
On your suggestion.
And give you entrance: but without this match,
I am perplex'd, and know not what to say.
Myself, well mounted, hardly have escaped.
None, but to lose your eyes.
Which scorns a modern invocation.
And make them tame to their obedience!
Now, say, Chatillon, what would France with us?
Exit the BASTARD
And two such shores to two such streams made one,
There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.
Must I rob the law?
Between my father and my mother lay,
That the time's enemies may not have this
And even at hand a drum is ready braced
What, shall our feast be kept with slaughter'd men?
Any annoyance in that precious sense!
Am bound to under-bear.
And for amends to his posterity,
No, no, I will not, having breath to cry:
And when that we have dash'd them to the ground,
You have beguiled me with a counterfeit
His highness yet doth speak, and holds belief
That right in peace which here we urge in war,
In this the antique and well noted face
Against the invulnerable clouds of heaven,
The Count Melun, a noble lord of France,
I prithee, lady, go away with me.
Exit PORTIA
Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am but,
Exeunt
Farewell, good Messala:
Exit LUCIUS
Then take we down his load, and turn him off,
What, is the fellow mad?
Contaminate our fingers with base bribes,
He is a great observer and he looks
No worthier than the dust!
Sennet. Exeunt CAESAR and all his Train, but CASCA
Give guess how near to day. Lucius, I say!
If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
Brutus had rather be a villager
I have not from your eyes that gentleness
Peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.
The Genius and the mortal instruments
Exeunt
Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war,
'Tis time to part.
Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
Grant that, and then is death a benefit:
For let the gods so speed me as I love
While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?
You speak to Casca, and to such a man
So well as by reflection, I, your glass,
He fell down in the market-place, and foamed at
Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at:
Thou know'st that we two went to school together:
That other men begin.
Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
Musing and sighing, with your arms across,
Who's there?
How like a deer, strucken by many princes,
If you dare fight to-day, come to the field,
No, my lord, I saw nothing.
Ho, Lucilius! hark, a word with you.
But he's a tried and valiant soldier.
Are yet two Romans living such as these?
To our attempts. Am I not stay'd for, Cinna?
Will you sup with me to-night, Casca?
Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome
That matter is answered directly.
Are come with Cassius.
Even at noon-day upon the market-place,
As tidings of this sight.
Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus:
Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
Where is he?
But never till to-night, never till now,
For shame, you generals! what do you mean?
For, I believe, they are portentous things
Pluck down benches.
Exeunt Citizens with the body
Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this
That part of tyranny that I do bear
To kindle cowards and to steel with valour
And therefore are they very dangerous.
What now, Lucilius! is Cassius near?
The three-fold world divided, he should stand
To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise:
The will! the testament!
Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
Thou hast described
Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
Let them set on at once, for I perceive
Come home to me, and I will wait for you.
Enter Poet, followed by LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, and LUCIUS
Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
He thinks too much: such men are dangerous.
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
There is no stir or walking in the streets,
I'll tell the news. Here comes the general.
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune,
Therein our letters do not well agree,
A woman well-reputed, Cato's daughter.
Exit
Loud alarum
And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.
Caesar, my lord?
And when the fit was on him, I did mark
time gentler than other, and at every putting-by
Our arms, in strength of malice, and our hearts
And so good morrow to you every one.
And here my naked breast, within, a heart
Hail, Caesar! read this schedule.
When it is lighted, come and call me here.
CAESAR goes up to the Senate-House, the rest following
He would embrace the means to come by it.
By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
When evils are most free? O, then by day
Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol,
But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
Peace then! no words.
If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,
What need we any spur but our own cause,
To you for gold to pay my legions,
Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
To whom it must be done.
For that which is not in me?
Did I not meet thy friends? and did not they
To make them instruments of fear and warning
What, Pindarus! where art thou, Pindarus?
My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
Are we all ready? What is now amiss
The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
into more work. But, indeed, sir, we make holiday,
Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart.
Nor with such free and friendly conference,
You shall, Mark Antony.
This morning are they fled away and gone,
As it hath much prevail'd on your condition,
These many, then, shall die, their names are prick'd.
This is Trebonius.
Hoping it was but an effect of humour,
This day I breathed first: time is come round,
Exit
And he shall wear his crown by sea and land,
Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
He is a friend.
I am not gamesome: I do lack some part
Even so.
Give him a statue with his ancestors.
It useth an enforced ceremony.
Let it be who it is: for Romans now
Hated by one he loves, braved by his brother,
Yield, or thou diest.
Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
and uttered such a deal of stinking breath because
Of any promise that hath pass'd from him.
Mean to establish Caesar as a king,
We will awake him and be sure of him.
That Brutus leads me on.
I know where I will wear this dagger then,
I'll rather kill myself.
Therefore let our alliance be combined,
Low alarums
Upon old Brutus' statue: all this done,
What can be avoided
O Caesar,--
Exeunt
For the base matter to illuminate
Upon what sickness?
And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
Thy brother by decree is banished:
Most like this dreadful night,
Nay, press not so upon me, stand far off.
Caesar refused the crown that it had almost choked
slew him. There is tears for his love, joy for his
As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
Aside to BRUTUS
He thinks he still is at his instrument.
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
Welcome, Publius.
He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius,
Exit MESSALA
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
I draw a sword against conspirators,
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
Stand!
I shall unfold to thee, as we are going
And Caesar shall go forth.
to Brutus', to Cassius', burn all: some to Decius'
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,--
In awe of such a thing as I myself.
Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace to-night:
Know I these men that come along with you?
Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
Exit
Exit LUCIUS
And I will give you audience.
There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
Caesar fell down. If the tag-rag people did not
I heard a bustling rumour, like a fray,
To do you salutation from his master.
When Caesar's head is off.
Shall Rome stand under one man's awe? What, Rome?
[Within]  Let me go in to see the generals,
Will you dine with me to-morrow?
And know it now: the senate have concluded
Of brothers' temper, do receive you in
May we do so?
As a friend or an enemy?
Get you to bed again, it is not day.
And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead,
And bay'd about with many enemies,
For piercing steel and darts envenomed
Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.
Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,
Peace, ho! Hear Antony. Most noble Antony!
SCENE II. CAESAR's house.
'ARTEMIDORUS.'
Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill,
In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
But what compact mean you to have with us?
With meditating that she must die once,
Under these hard conditions as this time
And yesterday the bird of night did sit
In favour's like the work we have in hand,
Nor for yours neither. You've ungently, Brutus,
You know that you are Brutus that speak this,
However he puts on this tardy form.
it was mere foolery, I did not mark it. I saw Mark
Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.
We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die with him.
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
They be alone.
Began to water. Is thy master coming?
Enter Citizens
If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.
If he love Caesar, all that he can do
In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
To stay the providence of some high powers
Call Claudius and some other of my men:
Caesar should be a beast without a heart,
But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
But here I am to speak what I do know.
Exit CINNA
But it was famed with more than with one man?
I will, sir.
Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords:
And do you now put on your best attire?
Wherein my letters, praying on his side,
And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
The gods do this in shame of cowardice:
There is no fear in him, let him not die,
Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed,
Nor I, my lord.
For I will slay myself.
May safely come to him, and be resolved
What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I
Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe more tears
And something to be done immediately.
Clock strikes
Thou art a fellow of a good respect,
Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
As who goes farthest.
O, you and I have heard our fathers say,
Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord
Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,
Indeed, they say the senators tomorrow
And will he steal out of his wholesome bed,
Cheque'd like a bondman, all his faults observed,
If not, when you have stomachs.
We'll mutiny.
O Brutus!
Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
What, urge you your petitions in the street?
With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
CASCA first, then the other Conspirators and BRUTUS stab CAESAR
So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief,
Fare you well.
Even by the rule of that philosophy
My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart:
Exit LUCIUS
Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,
Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
Is't possible?
Hie you, Messala,
Thorough the streets of Rome?
I cannot tell what you and other men
Like twenty torches join'd, and yet his hand,
That every nice offence should bear his comment.
Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.
And I must pause till it come back to me.
And dangers are to me indifferent.
Durst I have done my will. O Cassius,
But it sufficeth that the day will end,
And, when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
Before the eyes of both our armies here,
The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks,
He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
Beware the ides of March.
Enter CINNA the poet
Will purchase us a good opinion
If he improve them, may well stretch so far
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
Sheathe your dagger:
Here, my lord.
In several hands, in at his windows throw,
Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.
I can o'ersway him, for he loves to hear
These people at our back.
Ay, at Philippi.
SCENE I. A house in Rome.
What tributaries follow him to Rome,
Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
To find out you. Who's that? Metellus Cimber?
I am glad that my weak words
And show of love as I was wont to have:
Where's Publius?
Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
Good night, my lord.
Or else were this a savage spectacle:
Statilius show'd the torch-light, but, my lord,
off Caesar's images, are put to silence. Fare you
Varro and Claudius!
Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,
To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
Cicero one!
That by proscription and bills of outlawry,
Exeunt all but BRUTUS
Be you content: good Cinna, take this paper,
And therefore think him as a serpent's egg
I have no will to wander forth of doors,
Even from darkness.
Hath Cassius lived
I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,
The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
What does he say of Brutus?
When went there by an age, since the great flood,
Tear him, tear him! Come, brands ho! fire-brands:
In such a time as this it is not meet
And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
Enter PORTIA and LUCIUS
But I do find it cowardly and vile,
and so near will I be,
Let but the commons hear this testament--
Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.
But bear it as our Roman actors do,
Re-enter LUCIUS
It may be, these apparent prodigies,
Knocking within
Where do you dwell?
To hear the replication of your sounds
Delay not, Caesar, read it instantly.
Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
Let me work,
die all slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to live
It is my duty, sir.
O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts,
Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
Enter ANTONY and others, with CAESAR's body
Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
Do not presume too much upon my love,
That appertain to you? Am I yourself
All pity choked with custom of fell deeds:
SCENE IV. Another part of the same street, before the house of BRUTUS.
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous,
Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Descend.
Who to Philippi here consorted us:
[Within]  Nothing but death shall stay me.
Exeunt ANTONY and TREBONIUS
I would have had thee there, and here again,
Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
All the charactery of my sad brows:
Might fire the blood of ordinary men,
Why, then, lead on. O, that a man might know
Hack'd one another in the sides of Caesar:
Ne'er look'd but on my back, when they shall see
the theatre, I am no true man.
No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
Was the crown offered him thrice?
Than what I fear, for always I am Caesar.
For some new honours that are heap'd on Caesar.
Stay, countrymen.
Exeunt
Ay, Casca, tell us what hath chanced to-day,
That fears him much, and my misgiving still
though he had no hand in his death, shall receive
Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
If not, why then, this parting was well made.
Let us do so: for we are at the stake,
I know young bloods look for a time of rest.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
Trebonius: mark well Metellus Cimber: Decius Brutus
You suddenly arose, and walk'd about,
Will change to virtue and to worthiness.
Alarum. Enter BRUTUS and MESSALA
Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their
That Caesar is more dangerous than he:
The enemies of Caesar shall say this,
Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
And he shall say you are not well to-day:
Exeunt
Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
When you do find him, or alive or dead,
I would not, Cassius, yet I love him well.
Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds,
Weighing the youthful season of the year.
For he went sickly forth: and take good note
Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
We are two lions litter'd in one day,
SCENE III. A street.
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
Exeunt
Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter,
For Brutus is an honourable man,
Give so much light that I may read by them.
I cannot, by the progress of the stars,
No, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears,
Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word.
Enter the Ghost of CAESAR
Will modestly discover to yourself
For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,
Quite through the deeds of men: he loves no plays,
I'll leave you.
For the repealing of my banish'd brother?
And his opinion: now I change my mind,
Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops,
Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
Therefore thou sleep'st so sound.
Yes, you are.
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
BRUTUS and LUCILIUS converse apart
Now is it Rome indeed and room enough,
Even so great men great losses should endure.
Is this a holiday? what! know you not,
Good night, good brother.
So are we Caesar's friends, that have abridged
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope,
Fly further off, my lord, fly further off,
O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
[Aside]  That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
Prepare you, generals:
That did the latest service to my master.
But wherefore art not in thy shop today?
And leave us, Publius, lest that the people,
Enter ARTEMIDORUS, reading a paper
A flatterer's would not, though they do appear
They are, my lord.
Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.
Brutus will start a spirit as soon as Caesar.
Yet in the number I do know but one
And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
O hateful error, melancholy's child,
O masters, if I were disposed to stir
you may believe: censure me in your wisdom, and
Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,
And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make
He is a dreamer, let us leave him: pass.
was no less than his. If then that friend demand
If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
SCENE III. The same. A street.
Hence! I will follow.
face again: but those that understood him smiled at
offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand,
Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
Go bid the priests do present sacrifice
That made them do it: they are wise and honourable,
And say to all the world 'This was a man!'
Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
The clock hath stricken three.
Friends am I with you all and love you all,
Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him:
And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
And common good to all, made one of them.
The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
Re-enter LUCIUS
O Cassius, if you could
Why all these things change from their ordinance
I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong,
Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies,
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
Incenses them to send destruction.
Repair to Pompey's porch, where you shall find us.
Cry  'Havoc,' and let slip the dogs of war,
But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
Upon this hope, that you shall give me reasons
O, coward that I am, to live so long,
And the complexion of the element
I shall remember:
I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd
Meet to be sent on errands: is it fit,
What, Lucius, ho!
Nothing, Messala.
His funerals shall not be in our camp,
It is a creature that I teach to fight,
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.
Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
Fellow thou, awake!
occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word,
Why ask you? hear you aught of her in yours?
Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so.
Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through:
Cinna, where haste you so?
Re-enter LUCIUS with LIGARIUS
And look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
Which should perceive nothing but love from us,
And constant do remain to keep him so.
As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
Why, so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.
The name of Cassius honours this corruption,
We shall try fortune in a second fight.
Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.
You had but that opinion of yourself
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
If we do meet again, why, we shall smile,
Good friends, go in, and taste some wine with me,
Of any bold or noble enterprise,
Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,
Why, I will see thee at Philippi, then.
Exit LUCIUS
And partly credit things that do presage.
To bear my greeting to the senators
Stay, ho! and let us hear Mark Antony.
Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
Sennet. Exeunt all except BRUTUS and CASSIUS
He is a sick man that would speak with you.
And, sure, he is an honourable man.
Well, then I shall see thee again?
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
Shake off their sterile curse.
Companion, hence!
Ay: saw you any thing?
enforced, for which he suffered death.
I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts:
Of whose true-fix'd and resting quality
This paper, thus seal'd up, and, I am sure,
Lend me your hand.
But what trade art thou? answer me directly.
So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
Two several times by night, at Sardis once,
That day he overcame the Nervii:
And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
Brutus, a word with you.
Exit
I may do that I shall be sorry for.
For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love
Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
On abjects, orts and imitations,
Know you how much the people may be moved
Why, for that too.
Antony offer him a crown,--yet 'twas not a crown
If I myself, there is no hour so fit
Else shall you not have any hand at all
No Rome of safety for Octavius yet,
To see him pass on to the Capitol.
What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of
he fell. When he came to himself again, he said,
Hark, hark! one knocks: Portia, go in awhile,
The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
As huge as high Olympus.
Calpurnia!
Is Brutus sick? and is it physical
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Where never Roman shall take note of him.
Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth:
And swim to yonder point?' Upon the word,
Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
I thank you for your pains and courtesy.
Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
And it shall please me well: for mine own part,
Is it come to this?
And all the rest look like a chidden train:
A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
'Speak, strike, redress!' Am I entreated
To hide thee from prevention.
Sure, the boy heard me: Brutus hath a suit
Should chance--
--Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved
I have not slept.
Hear me, for I will speak.
Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,
Cassius, be content.
And, hark! they shout for joy.
Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
That visit my sad heart
From which advantage shall we cut him off,
Go to, you are not, Cassius.
And the persuasion of his augurers,
He hath brought many captives home to Rome
Exit
Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
We'll hear him. Noble Antony, go up.
Most noble! in the presence of thy corse?
His countenance, like richest alchemy,
In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
good of Rome, I have the same dagger for myself,
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
And leave them honeyless.
But that my noble master will appear
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
Therefore I took your hands, but was, indeed,
He lies not like the living. O my heart!
Fly not, stand stiff: ambition's debt is paid.
As a friend.
People and senators, be not affrighted,
And, her attendants absent, swallow'd fire.
loves thee not: thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius.
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome,
Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.
Pluck down forms, windows, any thing.
Shout
Alas, thou hast misconstrued every thing!
In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look,
The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
Beware the ides of March.
Do so, good Messala.
For taking bribes here of the Sardians,
To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
Peace! count the clock.
Believe not so.
extenuated, wherein he was worthy, nor his offences
My heart doth joy that yet in all my life
No, this was he, Messala,
As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome:
Forgets the shows of love to other men.
For they have grudged us contribution:
My lord?
And that which would appear offence in us,
why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer:
To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, conspiracy,
Write them together, yours is as fair a name,
Or else you use not. You look pale and gaze
Portia, what mean you? wherefore rise you now?
Re-enter TITINIUS, with MESSALA
In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
Not Erebus itself were dim enough
And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
I could be well moved, if I were as you:
The cruel issue of these bloody men,
Dies
Nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
If it be aught toward the general good,
Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
Now mark him, he begins again to speak.
Sit thee down, Clitus: slaying is the word,
Do so: and let no man abide this deed,
How died my master, Strato?
No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
With that which melteth fools, I mean, sweet words,
If he do break the smallest particle
It shall be done, my lord.
A crowd of people, among them ARTEMIDORUS and the  Soothsayer. Flourish. Enter CAESAR, BRUTUS,  CASSIUS, CASCA, DECIUS BRUTUS, METELLUS CIMBER,  TREBONIUS, CINNA, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, POPILIUS, PUBLIUS, and others
By that which he will utter?
But let not therefore my good friends be grieved--
So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
Let him go up into the public chair,
All this! ay, more: fret till your proud heart break,
PINDARUS stabs him
And dreadful objects so familiar
Peace, ho!
Portia, art thou gone?
And I will strive with things impossible,
Chastisement!
If he should stay at home to-day for fear.
Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
But when they should endure the bloody spur,
I shall not find myself so apt to die:
Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
bent against Caesar. If thou beest not immortal,
But cold demeanor in Octavius' wing,
But win the noble Brutus to our party--
Come Caesar to the Capitol to-morrow?
Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
Say I am merry: come to me again,
Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death,
Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls
As doth the lion in the Capitol,
To part the glories of this happy day.
Stir up their servants to an act of rage,
'Tis good. Go to the gate, somebody knocks.
Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
And I will bring him to the Capitol.
Flourish, and shout
First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you,
With untired spirits and formal constancy:
How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia!
Titinius, if thou lovest me,
My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
Bid every noise be still: peace yet again!
displeased them, as they use to do the players in
Ride, ride, Messala: let them all come down.
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius,
I should not urge thy duty past thy might,
Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup,
The nature of an insurrection.
Who offered him the crown?
I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
Welcome, good Messala.
He finds himself beholding to us all.
But for the general. He would be crown'd:
I never thought him worse.
Listen great things:--Brutus and Cassius
Only I yield to die:
O my dear brother!
Exeunt LUCILIUS and TITINIUS
He only, in a general honest thought
No.
Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone:
Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,
See whether their basest metal be not moved,
No place will please me so, no mean of death,
O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
There is no harm intended to your person,
Titinius' face is upward.
Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
The valiant never taste of death but once.
or four wenches, where I stood, cried 'Alas, good
Look, whether he have not crown'd dead Cassius!
Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.
Goes into the pulpit
Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it,
Blood and destruction shall be so in use
And not my husband's secrets?
Enter a Servant
You shall confess that you are both deceived.
As a sick girl. Ye gods, it doth amaze me
Let not our looks put on our purposes,
Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
Where I have took them up.
Then must I think you would not have it so.
PINDARUS descends
I know my hour is come.
Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,
And, friends, disperse yourselves, but all remember
With horsemen, that make to him on the spur,
O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,
Sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudius!
What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?
You shall not stir out of your house to-day.
And when I ask'd you what the matter was,
fingers off it. And then he offered it the third
Peace! let us hear what Antony can say.
I can shake off at pleasure.
He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
It is the part of men to fear and tremble,
By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
you, he put it by once: but, for all that, to my
Indeed he is not fit.
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive,
Exeunt severally
We'll burn his body in the holy place,
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
To walk unbraced and suck up the humours
Then walk we forth, even to the market-place,
I know not, sir.
truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor.
Some two months hence up higher toward the north
Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies
And for Mark Antony, think not of him,
My gown.
Exit
[To the Soothsayer]  The ides of March are come.
Upon a labouring day without the sign
Re-enter LUCIUS, with the gown
Stand you directly in Antonius' way,
To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony:
Well, Brutus, thou art noble, yet, I see,
Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
You gentle Romans,--
You have done that you should be sorry for.
mine honest neighbours shouted.
Most noble Caesar! We'll revenge his death.
Brutus and Caesar: what should be in that 'Caesar'?
Over your friend that loves you.
Enter CASSIUS
If you shall send them word you will not come,
You shall read us the will, Caesar's will.
Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
Yet I insisted, yet you answer'd not,
And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
And bid them speak for me: but were I Brutus,
I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.
Have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes.
recover them. As proper men as ever trod upon
To see the strange impatience of the heavens:
That this shall be, or we will fall for it?
Exeunt all the Commoners
I think he will stand very strong with us.
He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
'Shall Rome,  and c.' Thus must I piece it out:
Must end that work the ides of March begun,
Show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor poor dumb mouths,
Why dost thou stay?
Only be patient till we have appeased
Yes, Cassius, and, from henceforth,
And took his voice who should be prick'd to die,
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan,
And come, young Cato, let us to the field.
I'll get me to a place more void, and there
Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes, to get myself
Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
Than such a Roman.
Good morrow, Brutus, do we trouble you?
But, soft, I pray you: what, did Caesar swound?
Call'd you, my lord?
Accoutred as I was, I plunged in
Such as he is, full of regard and honour.
Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf,
Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
Have thus proceeded.
Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep,
I have a man's mind, but a woman's might.
Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
What hath proceeded worthy note to-day.
As Caesar's death hour, nor no instrument
Is not to-morrow, boy, the ides of March?
How every thing is chanced.
mouth, and was speechless.
A piece of work that will make sick men whole.
I blame you not for praising Caesar so,
Why, sir, a carpenter.
Cicero is dead,
Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
What enterprise, Popilius?
To be afraid to tell graybeards the truth?
Cowards die many times before their deaths,
If at Philippi we do face him there,
Unto the climate that they point upon.
That needs must light on this ingratitude.
Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,
O noble Caesar!
That Caesar looks so sad.
So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds
From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
Millions of mischiefs.
That I do fawn on men and hug them hard
Low alarums
Conceptions only proper to myself,
When Caesar says 'do this,' it is perform'd.
Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
Music, and a song
Set on your foot,
If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
As I am sure they do, bear fire enough
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
But, woe the while! our fathers' minds are dead,
Now, Antony, our hopes are answered:
He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.
Kills himself
Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
Exit Poet
Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
Hark! he is arrived.
The enemy increaseth every day,
Caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me
offered it to him again, then he put it by again:
Is not that he t hat lies upon the ground?
As to annoy us all: which to prevent,
Ay, if I be alive and your mind hold and your dinner
Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.
Room for Antony, most noble Antony.
O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
But when I tell him he hates flatterers,
Art thou here yet?
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
Out of the teeth of emulation.
That I have, lady: if it will please Caesar
We'll burn the house of Brutus.
You will compel me, then, to read the will?
So every bondman in his own hand bears
To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true:
Being mechanical, you ought not walk
And groaning underneath this age's yoke,
Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
To meet all perils very constantly.
I am ashamed I did yield to them.
Came smiling, and did bathe their hands in it:
This is my birth-day, as this very day
O mighty Caesar! dost thou lie so low?
Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come,
And I do fear them.
Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
When you are waspish.
Enter BRUTUS, DARDANIUS, CLITUS, STRATO, and VOLUMNIUS
look about you: security gives way to conspiracy.
As Cassius' legions are by Antony.
For in the ingrafted love he bears to Caesar--
Messala,
Caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
I shall be satisfied.
Young man, thou couldst not die more honourable.
To every Roman citizen he gives,
Exit CASSIUS, with some of the Citizens. BRUTUS goes into the pulpit
See what a rent the envious Casca made:
Follow me, then.
Who else would soar above the view of men
'Tis very like: he hath the failing sickness.
Which every noble Roman bears of you.
I will do so. But, look you, Cassius,
Into the market-place: there shall I try
And graze in commons.
Any exploit worthy the name of honour.
But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
Ay, and truly, you were best.
Bring him with triumph home unto his house.
Has he, masters?
Which is a great way growing on the south,
Not so, my lord.
To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
Be thou my witness that against my will,
It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
See Brutus at his house: three parts of him
For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
You have forgot the will I told you of.
I depart,--that, as I slew my best lover for the
Peace, silence! Brutus speaks.
'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,
Now, Decius Brutus, yours: now yours, Metellus,
Would run to these and these extremities:
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
Early to-morrow will we rise, and hence.
O ye gods,
In his own change, or by ill officers,
My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
And my heart too.
thinking, he would fain have had it. Then he
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
Did I say 'better'?
The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone,
'Tis better that the enemy seek us:
Ay, my lord, an't please you.
Did run pure blood: and many lusty Romans
Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
Exit
It is no matter, let no images
It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again,
The evil that men do lives after them,
Hath told you Caesar was ambitious:
Into the law of children. Be not fond,
Which, hatch'd, would, as his kind, grow mischievous,
Let's all cry 'Peace, freedom and liberty!'
Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy:
Here lies the east: doth not the day break here?
Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel:
Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
Octavius, lead your battle softly on,
And after that, he came, thus sad, away?
I have been up this hour, awake all night.
If you did, I care not.
Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes,
Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
But yet my nature could not bear it so.
Is now become a god, and Cassius is
Gentlemen all,--alas, what shall I say?
Every thing is well.
And turn pre-ordinance and first decree
Endure the winter's cold as well as he:
Begin it with weak straws: what trash is Rome,
Did we, my lord?
And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
There was a Brutus once that would have brook'd
It is impossible that ever Rome
Come down upon us with a mighty power,
By any mark of favour.
I am not well in health, and that is all.
Do grace to Caesar's corpse, and grace his speech
[Standing forth]  What says my general?
I will proclaim my name about the field:
O, now you weep, and, I perceive, you feel
Mark him and write his speeches in their books,
Begin his fashion: do not talk of him,
The enemy, marching along by them,
their worships to think it was his infirmity. Three
Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
We, at the height, are ready to decline.
Tell me your counsels, I will not disclose 'em:
A little from this ground.
Caesar, now be still:
That noble minds keep ever with their likes,
But are not some whole that we must make sick?
That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.
Give me my robe, for I will go.
Enter a Messenger
Antony,
Remember March, the ides of March remember:
And bear the palm alone.
We must not. A noble prisoner!
Exit
I'll fetch him presently.
These couchings and these lowly courtesies
'Help, ho! they murder Caesar!' Who's within?
Go you down that way towards the Capitol,
Alarum. Re-enter MESSALA, with BRUTUS, CATO, STRATO, VOLUMNIUS, and LUCILIUS
Come, Antony, away!
Depart untouch'd.
With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
Hide it in smiles and affability:
Exeunt
According to the which, thou shalt discourse
That fret the clouds are messengers of day.
And men have lost their reason. Bear with me,
That of yourself which you yet know not of.
We both have fed as well, and we can both
That should be in a Roman you do want,
He shall not live, look, with a spot I damn him.
Shall I entreat a word?
The secrets of my heart.
And in the spirit of men there is no blood:
Now, good Metellus, go along by him:
And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so,
Caesar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,
When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention.
'Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake, and see thyself.
And you are come in very happy time,
Shall be crown'd in Brutus.
His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.
That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
What says my lord?
Enter PINDARUS
I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
To see thy thy Anthony making his peace,
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman,
Yea, get the better of them. What's to do?
No, Messala.
About the ninth hour, lady.
It is more worthy to leap in ourselves,
O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
We'll hear the will: read it, Mark Antony.
You are contented to be led in triumph
The dint of pity: these are gracious drops.
Now I have taken heart thou vanishest:
And that craves wary walking. Crown him?--that,--
And, dying, mention it within their wills,
Even with the sword that kill'd thee.
Where many of the best respect in Rome,
And part the numbers.
No, I am promised forth.
Farewell, Cicero.
Therefore our everlasting farewell take:
Forget not, in your speed, Antonius,
Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
Both meet to hear and answer such high things.
ambition. Who is here so base that would be a
Stand!
Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet, stay awhile,
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go,
I would I might go to hell among the rogues. And so
Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough:
My master's man. Strato, where is thy master?
But for your private satisfaction,
You are not wood, you are not stones, but men,
I do, Mark Antony.
Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
A man no mightier than thyself or me
Exit Ghost
And tell me truly what thou think'st of him.
How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.
A curse shall light upon the limbs of men,
I have seen tempests, when the scolding winds
cause, and be silent, that you may hear: believe me
You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
Exit
Even at the base of Pompey's statua,
Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart:
You all do know this mantle: I remember
When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.
That unicorns may be betray'd with trees,
I have not known when his affections sway'd
Older in practise, abler than yourself
Struck Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
Under your pardon. You must note beside,
Or else the world, too saucy with the gods,
'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait,
For he will live, and laugh at this hereafter.
Speak in the order of his funeral.
Of honourable-dangerous consequence,
Writings all tending to the great opinion
What is 't o'clock?
To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
Caesar said to me 'Darest thou, Cassius, now
And thither will I straight to visit him:
Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,
What touches us ourself shall be last served.
I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
Have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone,
To walk abroad, and recreate yourselves.
Let it appear so, make your vaunting true,
And bring us word unto Octavius' tent
So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,
Well, honour is the subject of my story.
Is to himself, take thought and die for Caesar:
'Twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
I durst not!
Thy life hath had some smatch of honour in it:
The greater part, the horse in general,
I'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
The strings, my lord, are false.
Makes me forgetful?
Truly, my name is Cinna.
And am moreover suitor that I may
A peevish schoolboy, worthless of such honour,
Peace, ho!
Not sensible of fire, remain'd unscorch'd.
The Tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king.
The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground
Will he be satisfied.
I can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it:
The time of life: arming myself with patience
In at his window, set this up with wax
And having brought our treasure where we will,
A shrewd contriver, and, you know, his means,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
When grief, and blood ill-temper'd, vexeth him?
That you might see your shadow. I have heard,
Farewell, every one.
Have put to death an hundred senators.
And call in question our necessities.
Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.
As thou dost, Antony, he hears no music,
The face of Caesar, they are vanished.
Go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault,
To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads,
What trade, thou knave? thou naughty knave, what trade?
Brutus, my country's friend, know me for Brutus!
And buy men's voices to commend our deeds:
I will come home to you, or, if you will,
Good morrow, Caesar.
As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall,
It does, my boy:
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
'Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!'
With better appetite.
She is dead.
Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
For your dwelling,--briefly.
Here is the will, and under Caesar's seal.
ACT III
Fashion it thus, that what he is, augmented,
See! Antony, that revels long o' nights,
I doubt not of your wisdom.
I was sure your lordship did not give it me.
Shall Rome,  and c. Speak, strike, redress!
Are then in council, and the state of man,
And we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits,
Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
I think we are too bold upon your rest:
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
For ever, and for ever, farewell, Cassius!
Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
Here in the tent.
I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome!
Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'er-watch'd.
Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
According to his virtue let us use him,
throat to cut. An I had been a man of any
Decius, well urged: I think it is not meet,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Exeunt
Some to the common pulpits, and cry out
But for supporting robbers, shall we now
Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
his death is enrolled in the Capitol, his glory not
Which we will niggard with a little rest.
Judge me, you gods! wrong I mine enemies?
And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
Alarum. Retreat. Enter OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, MESSALA, LUCILIUS, and the army
Bid them prepare within:
And kill him in the shell.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
Ay.
Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm,
What Antony shall speak, I will protest
Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.
Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily,
Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes,
ANTONY, OCTAVIUS, and LEPIDUS, seated at a table
Which he did thrice refuse: was this ambition?
O Antony, beg not your death of us.
Is not to walk in.
Such instigations have been often dropp'd
Or here, or at the Capitol.
With the most noble blood of all this world.
I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
Never, till Caesar's three and thirty wounds
Is he alone?
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel:
What watchful cares do interpose themselves
No, not an oath: if not the face of men,
To VARRO
'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.
The power to cancel his captivity.
Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala:
Enter CALPURNIA
stabbed their mothers, they would have done no less.
Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home:
matters, but with awl. I am, indeed, sir, a surgeon
Into his ears, I may say, thrusting it,
My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
bondman? If any, speak, for him have I offended.
A man of such a feeble temper should
That by no means I may discover them
Our reasons are so full of good regard
Those that will follow Cassius, go with him,
Lions with toils and men with flatterers,
O, he sits high in all the people's hearts:
You all did love him once, not without cause:
Walk under his huge legs and peep about
And public reasons shall be rendered
And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
Set honour in one eye and death i' the other,
Ha! Portia!
Re-enter LUCIUS, with wine and taper
For Antony is but a limb of Caesar:
And died so?
Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
As fire drives out fire, so pity pity--
It proves not so: their battles are at hand,
I come to fetch you to the senate-house.
Hark thee, Dardanius.
That you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:
Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
Do so conjointly meet, let not men say
Is guilty of a several bastardy,
As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set
Look, Lucius, here's the book I sought for so,
None, Brutus, none.
Advances to CAESAR
His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
I said, an elder soldier, not a better:
By which he did ascend. So Caesar may.
Exeunt
What meanest thou by that? mend me, thou saucy fellow!
Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well,
Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus
Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
Another general shout!
And then the end is known. Come, ho! away!
If we do lose this battle, then is this
So often shall the knot of us be call'd
The posture of your blows are yet unknown,
So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up
As, by our hands and this our present act,
For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.
I have as much of this in art as you,
Is ours already, and the man entire
Mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him,
Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man
A canopy most fatal, under which
But if you would consider the true cause
time, he put it the third time by: and still as he
That they pass by me as the idle wind,
I will not have it so: lie down, good sirs,
Who glared upon me, and went surly by,
That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen
It shall be said, his judgment ruled our hands,
You pull'd me by the cloak, would you speak with me?
Alarum still
Live, Brutus! live, live!
O insupportable and touching loss!
If this were true, then should I know this secret.
Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires,
I must go in. Ay me, how weak a thing
To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage,
Make gallant show and promise of their mettle,
The gods to-day stand friendly, that we may,
Casca, by your voice.
Impatient of my absence,
When Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams.'
Leap in with me into this angry flood,
Why do you cross me in this exigent?
Let 'em enter.
I do consent--
A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
More than his reason. But 'tis a common proof,
Octavius, then take him to follow thee,
By your pardon,
If you do find them deck'd with ceremonies.
No, Cassius, no: think not, thou noble Roman,
Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
And stemming it with hearts of controversy,
Whereto the climber-upward turns his face,
Pardon, Caesar, Caesar, pardon:
Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
If he had done or said any thing amiss, he desired
To visit other places, and come down
Whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar, I do fear it.
Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,
They that have done this deed are honourable:
I but believe it partly,
But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
Here is himself, marr'd, as you see, with traitors.
My lord?
'Break up the senate till another time,
O Caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit
The morning comes upon 's: we'll leave you, Brutus.
And drawing days out, that men stand upon.
Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong,
And that were much he should, for he is given
To see my best friend ta'en before my face!
Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.
Make forth, the generals would have some words.
Yes, that thou didst: didst thou see any thing?
Love, and be friends, as two such men should be,
To young Octavius of the state of things.
And things unlucky charge my fantasy:
It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep,
Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out,
If Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no,
you'll bear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed, directly.
Cassius,
Dash him to pieces!
The good is oft interred with their bones,
I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
So are they all, all honourable men--
Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors,
Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony: who,
Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
And let me show you him that made the will.
They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
Stoop, then, and wash. How many ages hence
The sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse,--
Drum. Enter BRUTUS, CASSIUS, and their Army, LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, MESSALA, and others
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.
And though we lay these honours on this man,
At your best leisure, this his humble suit.
Send him but hither, and I'll fashion him.
well. There was more foolery yet, if I could
You show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
Why you are heavy, and what men to-night
As well as I do know your outward favour.
And reason to my love is liable.
The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
About his funeral: and you shall speak
Whispers
With Ate by his side come hot from hell,
With all respect and rites of burial.
Exeunt
That shapes this monstrous apparition.
Thou art a cobbler, art thou?
Come hither, sirrah:
Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,
Will bear no colour for the thing he is,
He bears too great a mind. But this same day
That's as much as to say, they are fools that marry:
Were I a common laugher, or did use
To think that or our cause or our performance
I do desire no more.
valiant, I honour him: but, as he was ambitious, I
So can I:
Let us not wrangle: bid them move away,
That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
Re-enter TREBONIUS
Good even, Casca: brought you Caesar home?
To cut the head off and then hack the limbs,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
His private arbours and new-planted orchards,
For I am arm'd so strong in honesty
O Caesar!--
My lord?
Villains, you did not so, when your vile daggers
By your leave, gods:--this is a Roman's part
But, with an angry wafture of your hand,
The proof of it will turn to redder drops. Look,
Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the
I charm you, by my once-commended beauty,
Drum. Enter BRUTUS, LUCILIUS, LUCIUS, and Soldiers, TITINIUS and PINDARUS meeting them
We'll send Mark Antony to the senate-house:
That is no fleering tell-tale. Hold, my hand:
Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
Doing himself offence, whilst we, lying still,
Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
Did Cicero say any thing?
For he will never follow any thing
And could it work so much upon your shape
I know not what may fall, I like it not.
But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
I do entreat you, not a man depart,
He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
Of marching to Philippi presently?
I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
Of late with passions of some difference,
Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
To dare the vile contagion of the night
I did not: he was but a fool that brought
Low march within
Trebonius doth desire you to o'erread,
He doth, for he did bid Antonius
That struck the foremost man of all this world
'Tis Caesar that you mean, is it not, Cassius?
That it runs over even at his eyes.
With what addition?
Have had to resort to you: for here have been
ANTONY comes down
I have slept, my lord, already.
A lioness hath whelped in the streets,
By any indirection: I did send
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
That could be moved to smile at any thing.
Why birds and beasts from quality and kind,
Alas, it cried 'Give me some drink, Titinius,'
Even in the aim and very flash of it.
Knocking within
Alarum. Enter fighting, Soldiers of both armies, then BRUTUS, CATO, LUCILIUS, and others
Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
Caesar cried 'Help me, Cassius, or I sink!'
I am to blame to be thus waited for.
Exeunt CLITUS, DARDANIUS, and VOLUMNIUS
That at his will he may do danger with.
Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad verses.
You shall have leave.
Exit CICERO
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
Crying 'Long live! hail, Caesar!'
Why, there was a crown offered him: and being
O woful day!
And bade him follow, so indeed he did.
Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold:
Antonius!
Sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy lethe.
Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd,
There's a bargain made.
Caesar, I will:
Stand back, room, bear back.
Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
Caesar than you shall do to Brutus. The question of
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
Thunder and lightning. Enter from opposite sides, CASCA, with his sword drawn, and CICERO
And bow'd like bondmen, kissing Caesar's feet,
Do you know them?
In states unborn and accents yet unknown!
If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
Flourish
What man is that?
Good night, Titinius. Noble, noble Cassius,
That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom.
Let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully,
And every man hence to his idle bed,
You stared upon me with ungentle looks,
For it is after midnight, and ere day
Must I observe you? must I stand and crouch
Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart,
Then, with your will, go on,
I was born free as Caesar, so were you:
conscience, which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
By them shall make a fuller number up,
And straight is cold again.
A prize no less in worth: keep this man safe,
Enter the Soothsayer
Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius! how?
Choose Caesar for their king.
You love me not.
Do stand but in a forced affection,
To know my errand, madam.
Enter PORTIA
A Roman.
Prithee, listen well,
Why comest thou?
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
I am not Cinna the conspirator.
What you have said, and show yourselves true Romans.
You did.
Will you go see the order of the course?
Brutus, bay not me,
SCENE II. The Forum.
ACT II
Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors,
if you be out, sir, I can mend you.
But here comes Antony.
Unshaked of motion: and that I am he,
Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house,
That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare?
As we were sickly prey: their shadows seem
I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.
Re-enter TITINIUS with MESSALA
How he received you, let me be resolved.
Guide thou the sword.
So get the start of the majestic world
You have right well conceited. Let us go,
Remember that you call on me to-day:
Ay, and wisely.
That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint.
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me:
O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
Never come such division 'tween our souls!
To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
O piteous spectacle!
How ill this taper burns! Ha! who comes here?
She dreamt to-night she saw my statua,
With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
You have condemn'd and noted Lucius Pella
The cause is in my will: I will not come,
Ay, and briefly.
The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!
I will myself into the pulpit first,
BRUTUS and CASSIUS whisper
I do not doubt
Where is he?
And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
That govern us below.
To undeservers.
Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night,
So I hope,
Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
Kneel not, gentle Portia.
Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
It comes upon me. Art thou any thing?
One of the three to share it?
O, name him not: let us not break with him,
Even so, Lucilius.
Calls my lord?
What news?
He lies to-night within seven leagues of Rome.
And after this let Caesar seat him sure,
to see Caesar and to rejoice in his triumph.
Not stingless too.
A common slave--you know him well by sight--
That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
To prick us to redress? what other bond
Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse
In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words:
Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
O, that we then could come by Caesar's spirit,
Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
Their infants quarter'd with the hands of war,
Give him all kindness: I had rather have
And so bestow these papers as you bade me.
Then leave him out.
Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
Peace there! hear the noble Antony.
O ye gods, ye gods! must I endure all this?
Render me worthy of this noble wife!
Then none have I offended. I have done no more to
Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
Re-enter ANTONY
My sight was ever thick, regard Titinius,
It is not for your health thus to commit
The mighty gods defend thee! Thy lover,
He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
Your brother too must die, consent you, Lepidus?
But not with such familiar instances,
Exit
Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.
The exhalations whizzing in the air
And touch thy instrument a strain or two?
No.
What you would work me to, I have some aim:
Words before blows: is it so, countrymen?
And pity to the general wrong of Rome--
But all be buried in his gravity.
The barren, touched in this holy chase,
For, if you should, O, what would come of it!
In every wound of Caesar that should move
Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
O traitors, villains!
When there is in it but one only man.
Exit LUCIUS
Will come when it will come.
I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
Send word to you he would be there to-morrow.
If I could pray to move, prayers would move me:
A hot friend cooling: ever note, Lucilius,
Do so. Farewell, both.
No more. Good night:
Lay'st thou thy leaden mace upon my boy,
It was a vision fair and fortunate:
But I am constant as the northern star,
And drive away the vulgar from the streets:
To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!
Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far,
Be not deceived: if I have veil'd my look,
Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,
I had as lief not be as live to be
To towers and windows, yea, to chimney-tops,
His coward lips did from their colour fly,
Now, Cinna: now, Metellus: what, Trebonius!
Exeunt
Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,
Now, most noble Brutus,
Which he did give himself, I know not how,
Than secret Romans, that have spoke the word,
You said the enemy would not come down,
And in their steads do ravens, crows and kites,
as you would say, a cobbler.
I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love.
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
Our enemies have beat us to the pit:
Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
Upon condition Publius shall not live,
there's no heed to be taken of them, if Caesar had
To sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear
I fear there will a worse come in his place.
As easily as a king.
As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
It would become me better than to close
Though it do split you, for, from this day forth,
Peace, ho! let us hear him.
Welcome, Mark Antony.
And I will set this foot of mine as far
Alarums. Enter CASSIUS and TITINIUS
That young Octavius and Mark Antony
Yet I fear him,
plucked me ope his doublet and offered them his
I dare assure thee that no enemy
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard.
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
Who else must be let blood, who else is rank:
You, sir, what trade are you?
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
Be hung with Caesar's trophies. I'll about,
And not for justice? What, shall one of us
ACT I
All but Metellus Cimber, and he's gone
Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.
Why, Antony.
Dost thou here lie!
That touches Caesar nearer: read it, great Caesar.
This by Calpurnia's dream is signified.
And, this last night, here in Philippi fields:
Kind souls, what, weep you when you but behold
On business to my brother Cassius.
Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears,
Come down.
Stands, as the Capitol, directly here.
And so return to you, and nothing else?
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I,
Should outlive Caesar: we shall find of him
What dost thou with thy best apparel on?
Which, by the right and virtue of my place,
These tidings will well comfort Cassius.
Strike, as thou didst at Caesar, for, I know,
Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee:
ACT IV
But keep the hills and upper regions,
And that we are contented Caesar shall
Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest,
No, Caesar hath it not, but you and I,
What was the second noise for?
Tending to Caesar's glories, which Mark Antony,
Yes, every man of them, and no man here
That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed!
A very pleasing night to honest men.
I have an hour's talk in store for you,
The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon!
This was the noblest Roman of them all:
All my engagements I will construe to thee,
A wretched creature and must bend his body,
Can be retentive to the strength of spirit,
An humble heart,--
And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus:
Take up the body.
Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
There is no fellow in the firmament.
Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus:
Ha, ha! how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
Enter a Servant
May hold him from the Capitol to-day.
He came not back: he is or ta'en or slain.
Enter DECIUS BRUTUS
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed,
Being so father'd and so husbanded?
You see we do, yet see you but our hands
Enter BRUTUS
Which gives men stomach to digest his words
The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,
Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women,
Take thou what course thou wilt!
Fear him not, Caesar, he's not dangerous,
PINDARUS ascends the hill
I do not like your faults.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest--
Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
Like wrath in death and envy afterwards,
Look, how he makes to Caesar, mark him.
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
I pray you, do.
Get you hence, sirrah, saucy fellow, hence!
And, for my sake, stay here with Antony:
The angry spot doth glow on Caesar's brow,
That now on Pompey's basis lies along
Re-enter Servant
This dream is all amiss interpreted,
And I the elder and more terrible:
Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
Well, to our work alive. What do you think
Good night, Lord Brutus.
Dies
I do believe that these applauses are
That ever lived in the tide of times.
And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
Thou never comest unto a happy birth,
Do not go forth to-day: call it my fear
The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
Not I.
Or lose our ventures.
Cassius, go you into the other street,
This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you,
Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of wine.
I do not cross you, but I will do so.
SCENE II. A public place.
Lucius, awake!
But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!
Come, come, the cause: if arguing make us sweat,
In our own proper entrails.
There's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
Exit
Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were living and
Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown,
And I will seek for Pindarus the while.
Who, you all know, are honourable men:
And let us swear our resolution.
I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,
Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
Unto their issue.
Immediately to us.
That heaven hath infused them with these spirits,
When love begins to sicken and decay,
Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat:
I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,
Night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest,
They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for?
Of Caesar's death.
Good night, and good repose.
Re-enter CAESAR and his Train
Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me: yet,
Be any further moved. What you have said
Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,
A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March.
That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
Should I have answer'd Caius Cassius so?
Opens the letter and reads
Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
Under your testy humour? By the gods
Hath almost ended his life's history:
Thunder and lightning. Enter CAESAR, in his night-gown
For I can give his humour the true bent,
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept:
My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
When could they say till now, that talk'd of Rome,
Romans, countrymen, and lovers! hear me for my
O ye immortal gods!
Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy,
Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,
This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
Enter CASSIUS and his powers
I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.
Stand fast, Titinius: we must out and talk.
Am I not stay'd for? tell me.
Great Caesar,--
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
O world, thou wast the forest to this hart,
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!
Like a Colossus, and we petty men
Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus,
That you unfold to me, yourself, your half,
And will not palter? and what other oath
Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time:
I dreamt to-night that I did feast with Caesar,
Tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator.
Belike they had some notice of the people,
Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears
You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life
remember it.
And we, like friends, will straightway go together.
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
Come down, behold no more.
Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream:
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,
Have not you love enough to bear with me,
Where is Antony?
Enter BRUTUS and CASSIUS
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:
He is address'd: press near and second him.
Where Brutus may but find it, and throw this
I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord,
Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
To groan and sweat under the business,
I found no man but he was true to me.
Is there no voice more worthy than my own
And so it is. For this time I will leave you:
But since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
This it is:
Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?
And dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
I will with patience hear, and find a time
Be patient till the last.
What are you then determined to do?
But yesterday the word of Caesar might
March
And then we will deliver you the cause,
You should be satisfied.
Away, then! come, seek the conspirators.
The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
SCENE III. A street near the Capitol.
These growing feathers pluck'd from Caesar's wing
And Caesar's spirit, ranging for revenge,
Why, for that too.
Whispers
None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.
Enter LUCIUS
There is no more to say?
as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it, as he was
Shall no man else be touch'd but only Caesar?
And this way have you well expounded it.
Flourish. Enter CAESAR, ANTONY, for the course,  CALPURNIA, PORTIA, DECIUS BRUTUS, CICERO, BRUTUS,  CASSIUS, and CASCA, a great crowd following, among them a Soothsayer
Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here,
It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius
If that thou be'st a Roman, take it forth,
Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
My answer must be made. But I am arm'd,
That mothers shall but smile when they behold
all free men? As Caesar loved me, I weep for him,
I will not come to-day: tell them so, Decius.
When that rash humour which my mother gave me
Hence! home, you idle creatures get you home:
I will hear Brutus speak.
Let not a traitor live!
Ha! who calls?
Caesar?
And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs
To every new protester, if you know
I did not think you could have been so angry.
The abuse of greatness is, when it disjoins
And tell me what thou notest about the field.
How that might change his nature, there's the question.
to old shoes, when they are in great danger, I
Giving myself a voluntary wound
How he did shake: 'tis true, this god did shake,
Yet hear me, countrymen, yet hear me speak.
O, let us have him, for his silver hairs
Most like a soldier, order'd honourably.
My countrymen,--
neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.
Which, out of use and staled by other men,
Of your philosophy you make no use,
Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus.
Men at some time are masters of their fates:
Talk not of standing. Publius, good cheer,
And keep us all in servile fearfulness.
That her wide walls encompass'd but one man?
It must be by his death: and for my part,
'Tis just:
To do I know not what: but it sufficeth
I must prevent thee, Cimber.
In our black sentence and proscription.
Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
No, Caesar shall not: danger knows full well
He's ta'en.
Shall Caesar send a lie?
Our purpose necessary and not envious:
Fulfil your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
So in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
For I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye.
Cassius, be constant:
And I do know, by this, they stay for me
Being cross'd in conference by some senators.
In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.
Why, friends, you go to do you know not what:
Among which number, Cassius, be you one--
Than honesty to honesty engaged,
I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it:
And I will look on both indifferently,
Dies
But when he once attains the upmost round.
And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
For Cassius is aweary of the world,
He is a noble Roman and well given.
I shall recount hereafter, for this present,
Within my tent his bones to-night shall lie,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,
But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
I'll not endure it: you forget yourself,
And Cassius too.
Read the will, we'll hear it, Antony,
Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice
Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
We shall be call'd purgers, not murderers.
I have, when you have heard what I can say:
Upon one battle all our liberties.
O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
Fled to his house amazed:
And let us presently go sit in council,
And to your heirs for ever, common pleasures,
Nothing, my lord.
Set on, and leave no ceremony out.
For my part, I have walk'd about the streets,
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
Where did you leave him?
Between the acting of a dreadful thing
And we will follow.
O royal Caesar!
Exit
Gave sign for me to leave you: so I did,
I urged you further, then you scratch'd your head,
I'll know his humour, when he knows his time:
Sleek-headed men and such as sleep o' nights:
'Tis three o'clock, and, Romans, yet ere night
And nature must obey necessity,
And mayst be honour'd, being Cato's son.
Caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy Caesar:
Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
Sir, March is wasted fourteen days.
I fear I wrong the honourable men
This, Casca, this, Cinna, and this, Metellus Cimber.
Why are you breathless? and why stare you so?
Low-crooked court'sies and base spaniel-fawning.
Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius.
[Standing forth]	My lord?
That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight,
We will be satisfied, let us be satisfied.
Have made themselves so strong:--for with her death
Now sit we close about this taper here,
The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
And when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open
Will you be patient? will you stay awhile?
Before a willing bondman, then I know
Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.
Never fear that: if he be so resolved,
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring
He wish'd to-day our enterprise might thrive.
That I profess myself in banqueting
I know not what you mean by that, but, I am sure,
What, shall I find you here?
That gave me public leave to speak of him:
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
They mean this night in Sardis to be quarter'd,
To what effect?
And none so poor to do him reverence.
Exeunt all but BRUTUS
Fearing to strengthen that impatience
But as a property. And now, Octavius,
Without annoying me: and there were drawn
Go fetch fire.
Upon the left hand of the even field.
Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
Away, away, be gone.
Stand, ho!
Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear:
Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
What said he when he came unto himself?
And, for thy humour, I will stay at home.
Into the channel, till the lowest stream
That Caesar and his senate must redress?
Exeunt
Merely upon myself. Vexed I am
Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up
Would he were fatter! But I fear him not:
Casca will tell us what the matter is.
You know that I held Epicurus strong
Flatterers! Now, Brutus, thank yourself:
I will, my lord.
I have the patience to endure it now.
But we the doers.
Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?
Your reason?
They would not have you to stir forth to-day.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
Caesar's better parts
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
It will inflame you, it will make you mad:
one another and shook their heads, but, for mine own
The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,
Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
What mean you, Caesar? think you to walk forth?
This way will I disrobe the images,
Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
Alas, you know not: I must tell you then:
As if they came from several citizens,
Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow:
I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep,
Say I love Brutus, and I honour him,
I would not, so with love I might entreat you,
So call the field to rest, and let's away,
By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
vile that will not love his country? If any, speak,
What say the augurers?
What is't o'clock?
Octavius, I have seen more days than you:
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears,
Speak to me what thou art.
And too impatiently stamp'd with your foot,
This is a sleepy tune. O murderous slumber,
Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
We will be revenged.
Enter CINNA
Kill Brutus, and be honour'd in his death.
All disconsolate,
Stir not until the signal.
Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue!
In my oration, how the people take
Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman? If
His life was gentle, and the elements
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
A ring, stand round.
commonwealth, as which of you shall not? With this
And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder,
At mine own house, good lady.
Submitting me unto the perilous night,
Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
So you thought him,
That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
If the redress will follow, thou receivest
You wronged yourself to write in such a case.
clap him and hiss him, according as he pleased and
The breast of heaven, I did present myself
How 'scaped I killing when I cross'd you so?
And say you do't by our permission,
Alarum. Cry within, 'Fly, fly, fly!'
Away, slight man!
Hence! wilt thou lift up Olympus?
Be it so.
Combine together 'gainst the enemy,
The duke's to blame in this, 'twill be ill taken.
I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
I will be jovial: come, come, I am a king,
Go you before to Gloucester with these letters.
Exit an Attendant
tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message
Or he that makes his generation messes
but a provoking merit, set a-work by a reprovable
I yet beseech your majesty,--
What, fifty of my followers at a clap!
Judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot
When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound,
That in the natures of their lords rebel,
Men so disorder'd, so debosh'd and bold,
SCENE VI. Fields near Dover.
With him,
A proclaim'd prize! Most happy!
If none appear to prove upon thy head
And dare, upon the warrant of my note,
When it is mingled with regards that stand
Remember what I tell you.
Shut up your doors, my lord, 'tis a wild night:
Go in with me: my duty cannot suffer
noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his
If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
And for one blast of thy minikin mouth,
That guard, and most unusual vigilance,
Let's see, let's see.
This is nothing, fool.
This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
I find she names my very deed of love,
You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
Is he not here?
'Affectionate servant,
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
But who is with him?
There shall he sit till noon.
Saddle my horses, call my train together:
Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,
dearer father in my love.
I am sure on't, not a word.
Fall, and cease!
I should be false persuaded I had daughters.
This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?
Nothing.
Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
I and my hundred knights.
Exit Gentleman
May blame, but not control. Who's there? the traitor?
hear my lord speak: pray ye, go, there's my key:
Exeunt severally
Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
together: if our father carry authority with
Or whether since he is advised by aught
Striking his head
No, faith, lords and great men will not let me, if
Enter EDGAR
My most dear Gloucester!
Your loop'd and window'd raggedness, defend you
Who stock'd my servant? Regan, I have good hope
Come with my lady hither.
To EDGAR
comedy: my cue is villanous melancholy, with a
To knee his throne, and, squire-like, pension beg
To Edmund earl of Gloucester, seek him out
SCENE I. The heath.
The natural fool of fortune. Use me well,
This way, my lord.
I am sorry for thee, friend, 'tis the duke's pleasure,
No more, the text is foolish.
My lord of Burgundy.
I have full cause of weeping, but this heart
The foul fiend bites my back.
sigh like Tom o' Bedlam. O, these eclipses do
Sir, this young fellow's mother could: whereupon
Where is my lord of Gloucester?
To have her gentleman abused, assaulted,
Tell me what more thou know'st.
And machination ceases. Fortune love you.
A bitter fool!
Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.
SCENE II. Before Gloucester's castle.
To be opposed against the warring winds?
To show their open banner. Now to you:
Offering KENT his cap
It were a delicate stratagem, to shoe
Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer
Do scald like moulten lead.
Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
To wage against the enmity o' the air,
Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
wantons, down!' 'Twas her brother that, in pure
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters:
Sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here:
Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!
know than comes from her demand out of the letter.
I'll prove it on thy heart,
gave me nothing for't. Can you make no use of
portend these divisions! fa, sol, la, mi.
My sister may receive it much more worse,
Dry up in her the organs of increase,
Ho, you sir! friend! Hear you, sir! speak!
What mean your graces? Good my friends, consider
What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou
Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
for my duty cannot be silent when I think your
This hideous rashness: answer my life my judgment,
Her husband being alive. Now then we'll use
Ay, good my lord.
May not an ass know when the cart
Why, my boy?
Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly,
And she will tell you who your fellow is
impatience: the gods reward your kindness!
This house is little: the old man and his people
[Aside]	Then poor Cordelia!
The prince of darkness is a gentleman:
All cruels else subscribed: but I shall see
Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril--
O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall's dead:
care for her frowning, now thou art an O without a
Then leave her, sir, for, by the power that made me,
That hath deprived me of your grace and favour,
How now, nuncle! Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!
My services to your lordship.
That's something yet: Edgar I nothing am.
That make ingrateful man!
And ask of thee forgiveness: so we'll live,
Shall see their children kind.
Nor is not, sure.
Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind:
Must make content with his fortunes fit,
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
If she sustain him and his hundred knights
the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pandar,
Royal Lear,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers,--
The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
Tucket within
That such a king should play bo-peep,
Who wouldst thou serve?
Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants
Who dead? speak, man.
Till it cry sleep to death.
As may compact it more. Get you gone,
Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor,
Enter, with drum and colours, EDMUND, REGAN, Gentlemen, and Soldiers.
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
Come, my good lord, away.
That's as we list to grace him.
You are a spirit, I know: when did you die?
The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
Decline your head: this kiss, if it durst speak,
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
Since now we will divest us both of rule,
Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' the town,
These dispositions, that of late transform you
Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
she grew round-wombed, and had, indeed, sir, a son
O ruin'd piece of nature! This great world
Some that will thank you, making just report
Invades us to the skin: so 'tis to thee,
appears too grossly.
My Regan counsels well, come out o' the storm.
Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
Ask me not what I know.
Talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too,
Stocking his messenger.
That to our sister you do make return,
More than in your addition.
Speak, man.
Have in thy reverence made!
Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
So white, and such a traitor!
My practises ride easy! I see the business.
I' the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,
of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
Against the grace and person of my master,
With how depraved a quality--O Regan!
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
Pray, do not, sir: I have watched and travell'd hard,
Tucket within
'Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of 'father'
It will come,
Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
When we are born, we cry that we are come
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain
O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your
I will not swear these are my hands: let's see,
O villain, villain! His very opinion in the
So old and white as this. O! O! 'tis foul!
Horns within. Enter KING LEAR, Knights, and Attendants
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
No, sir, but you have that in your countenance
And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
Were like a better way: those happy smilets,
Look up, my lord.
First let me talk with this philosopher.
They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl
I bar it in the interest of my wife:
a heavy case, your purse in a light, yet you see how
Persuade me to the murder of your lordship,
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend,
During the life of this old majesty,
The name, and all the additions to a king,
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
In rank and not-to-be endured riots. Sir,
And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
As clears her from all blame.
Although the last, not least, to whose young love
Exit EDGAR
Enter OSWALD
Regan, I think you are, I know what reason
If it be man's work, I'll do 't.
With a more riotous appetite.
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
for being old before thy time.
Hast practised on man's life: close pent-up guilts,
The night before there was no purpose in them
My name is Edgar, and thy father's son.
Nor I neither, but I can tell why a snail has a house.
The treasury of life, when life itself
traitor. Bless thy five wits! Tom's a-cold,--O, do
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
that without any further delay than this very evening.
Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
And bring him to our eye.
Stand in assured loss: take up, take up,
These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness
This is the excellent foppery of the world, that,
thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what
If for I want that glib and oily art,
[Within]  Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!
But let his disposition have that scope
Pardon me, royal sir,
Is wretchedness deprived that benefit,
Alarum within. Enter, with drum and colours,  KING LEAR, CORDELIA, and Soldiers, over the stage, and exeunt
the thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
What is your difference? speak.
lily-livered, action-taking knave, a whoreson,
Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell:
We'll teach you--
Do you mark that, my lord?
And speak't again, my lord, no more with me.
Acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you
Will I give place or notice.
All the stored vengeances of heaven fall
What art thou that dost grumble there i' the straw?
first. Come.
Which can distinguish sound.
Your name, your quality? and why you answer
Out, treacherous villain!
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
Let me hire him too: here's my coxcomb.
Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
Mine eyes are not o' the best: I'll tell you straight.
Exeunt
Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate
The knowledge of themselves.
Kent banish'd thus! and France in choler parted!
How far your eyes may pierce I can not tell:
Thy arm may do thee justice: here is mine.
You are welcome hither.
To have a thousand with red burning spits
I know thee well enough, thy name is Gloucester:
Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
king himself.
him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great
disposition to the charge of a star! My
Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
Tooth that poisons if it bite,
makes these hard hearts?
Their scanted courtesy.
How long have you been a sectary astronomical?
O, matter and impertinency mix'd! Reason in madness!
And the king gone to-night! subscribed his power!
I would learn that, for, by the
To 't, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.
It is his hand, my lord, but I hope his heart is
Hearty thanks:
Have follow'd your sad steps.
as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come to
Re-enter KING LEAR with GLOUCESTER
Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
I am cut to the brains.
The wheel is come full circle: I am here.
SCENE I. A heath.
Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
If the matter of this paper be certain, you have
Who's there?
To quit this horrid act.
Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!
Must be content to think you old, and so--
Be-monster not thy feature. Were't my fitness
Know, my name is lost,
Soon may I hear and see him!
Alack, I have no eyes.
Why, then, I care not for thee.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
Infirmity doth still neglect all office
My lord of Kent: remember him hereafter as my
beholding. Advise the duke, where you are going, to
reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself
Give me thy hand, come on.
Intelligence is given where you are hid,
No seconds? all myself?
Cried 'Sisters! sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters!
I will look further into't. But where's my fool? I
sir?
Shall so wear out to nought. Dost thou know me?
Good my liege,--
Arraign her first, 'tis Goneril. I here take my
I know when one is dead, and when one lives,
See'st thou this object, Kent?
To some retention and appointed guard,
Far off, methinks, I hear the beaten drum:
In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him,
Pardon me, dear madam,
Follow me, thou shalt serve me: if I like thee no
In wisdom I should ask thy name,
Till time and I think meet.
What grows of it, no matter, advise your fellows so:
Which, if convenience will not allow,
Topple down headlong.
Thy sheep shall take no harm.
When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage,
Ay, master.
palaces, treason, and the bond cracked 'twixt son
ACT II
pity him, they took from me the use of mine own
Parted you in good terms? Found you no
Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded,
I know no news, my lord.
Where learned you this, fool?
Enter GLOUCESTER, with a torch
Or cease your quest of love?
Flourish. Exeunt all but KING OF FRANCE, GONERIL, REGAN, and CORDELIA
I have received a hurt: follow me, lady.
What's he that hath so much thy place mistook
Let us withdraw, 'twill be a storm.
By her is poisoned, she hath confess'd it.
Burst smilingly.
As much as child e'er loved, or father found,
runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with
May all the building in my fancy pluck
observation we have made of it hath not been
My lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence:
By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
Not so hot:
'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
And my heart breaks at it.
I have a letter guessingly set down,
My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
I would you would make use of that good wisdom,
have perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I
Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:
My curses on her!
That, if my speech offend a noble heart,
Take them away.
Away, get thee away, good friend, be gone:
Dies
Near and on speedy foot, the main descry
To amplify too much, would make much more,
Ay, my good lord.
'Enough, enough,' and die. That thing you speak of,
Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
For your good host, pray that the right may thrive:
That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs,
That thou mayst shake the superflux to them,
And let not women's weapons, water-drops,
I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
The duke must grant me that: besides, his picture
[Aside]  If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.
Where may we set our horses?
As we shall find their merits and our safety
I'll not be struck, my lord.
Exit
and father. This villain of mine comes under the
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
out-paramoured the Turk: false of heart, light of
That this our court, infected with their manners,
betwixt us. Farewell, dear sister: farewell, my
Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No:
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
His daughters seek his death: ah, that good Kent!
condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness
go follow them to prison:
Bear them from hence. Our present business
Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back,
Leave, gentle wax, and, manners, blame us not:
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
no good to us: though the wisdom of nature can
Which is that adversary?
That's but a trifle here.
I warrant thee.
For instant remedy: be then desired
Enter Gentleman
like myself in this, let him be whipped that first
Which made me think a man a worm: my son
By no means what?
As I learn'd,
Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
than as a very pretence and purpose of unkindness:
I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
Great thing of us forgot!
Unwhipp'd of justice: hide thee, thou bloody hand,
Why, to put his head in, not to give it away to his
Enter OSWALD
Enter KENT
should enjoy half his revenue,'--My son Edgar!
The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
Then let them anatomize Regan, see what breeds
I have this present evening from my sister
Now fare you well, good sir.
Enter KENT, disguised
broke them in the sweet face of heaven: one that
Without our grace, our love, our benison.
Holla the other.
When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
business after your own wisdom. I would unstate
Who can arraign me for't.
Where have you hid yourself?
Inform'd them! Dost thou understand me, man?
When majesty stoops to folly. Reverse thy doom,
One step I have advanced thee, if thou dost
Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
Good sir, no more, these are unsightly tricks:
Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops,
My villain!
Which presently they read: on whose contents,
But kept a reservation to be follow'd
Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
whoreson must be acknowledged. Do you know this
A troop of horse with felt: I'll put 't in proof,
No? What needed, then, that terrible dispatch of
This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble,
fear and danger, that his personal return was
Did I not, fellow?
To bring but five and twenty: to no more
Horns whelk'd and waved like the enridged sea:
world before he was sent for, yet was his mother
unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor bare,
And frustrate his proud will.
Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?
Exeunt some Servants
What he his heart should make
Sir, speed you: what's your will?
Upon the crown o' the cliff, what thing was that
To set thee here?
Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp,
And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law,
My love should kindle to inflamed respect.
and horror of it: pray you, away.
She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
Where's my fool, ho? I think the world's asleep.
I'll bring you comfort.
Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature
wine loved I deeply, dice dearly: and in woman
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
If both remain alive: to take the widow
Commanded me to follow, and attend
As I stood here below, methought his eyes
You justicers, that these our nether crimes
An you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipped.
and left nothing i' the middle: here comes one o'
Which we durst never yet, and with strain'd pride
All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,
By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit:
O, sir, you are old.
How now, daughter! what makes that frontlet on?
Go thou: I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
Then 'tis like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer, you
How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
Arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it.
Necessity's sharp pinch! Return with her?
It is both he and she,
Her delicate cheek: it seem'd she was a queen
That very dogs disdain'd: and in this habit
Are not the question here.
our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish
To strike at me, upon his misconstruction,
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head:
Why I do trifle thus with his despair
Who, with best meaning, have incurr'd the worst.
The question of Cordelia and her father
for him, that he hath wrote this to feel my
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Is this the promised end
From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en
Then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
Come hissing in upon 'em,--
His countenance for the battle, which being done,
Now, sweet lord,
Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take
As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off
To the great love I bear you,--
It came even from the heart of--O, she's dead!
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
Thou hast her, France: let her be thine, for we
Enter a Herald
I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats,
Wherefore, bold peasant,
fain think it were not.
Thy flesh and bones: howe'er thou art a fiend,
The tyranny of the open night's too rough
I am come
We do require them of you, so to use them
graves. Find out this villain, Edmund, it shall
Who have--as who have not, that their great stars
Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer,
Which very manners urges.
highness wronged.
Jesters do oft prove prophets.
Follow me not,
That on the unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes,
Alarum and retreat within. Re-enter EDGAR
Come hither, fellow.
On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
Yes, madam.
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence,
Prithee, away.
Upon the British party: O, untimely death!
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony,
Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
A serving-man, proud in heart and mind, that curled
For, with throwing thus my head,
Nature in you stands on the very verge
And keep in-a-door,
[Aside]  O gods! Who is't can say 'I am at
For, you trow, nuncle,
I know that voice.
seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.
Mark it, nuncle:
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit:
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
Than for your lady's: you may gather more.
To noble fortunes: know thou this, that men
To see another thus. I know not what to say.
Kind and dear princess!
And your large speeches may your deeds approve,
Rather than die at once!--taught me to shift
Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural
Escaped the hunt. No port is free, no place,
If he be taken, he shall never more
Why, fare thee well: I will o'erlook thy paper.
That she fordid herself.
The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long,
Drew on me here again.
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
Marry, your manhood now--
Most certain, sir.
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me:
I never yet was valiant: for this business,
Will't please your highness walk?
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon:
But better service have I never done you
In hell-black night endured, would have buoy'd up,
the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages,
To his father, that so tenderly and entirely
It shall be done, I will arraign them straight.
Hot questrists after him, met him at gate,
Of her confine: you should be ruled and led
The body's delicate: the tempest in my mind
That were the opposites of this day's strife:
Makes thee the happier: heavens, deal so still!
This shall not be revoked.
The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.
but slenderly known himself.
Modo he's call'd, and Mahu.
Why she dares not come over to thee.
Ay, madam, in the heaviness of his sleep
I had a monopoly out, they would have part on't:
SCENE IV. A hall in the same.
Exit a Knight
I see it feelingly.
That dares not undertake: he'll not feel wrongs
Did hate thee or thy father!
Who hath most fortunately been inform'd
If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,
There is a litter ready, lay him in 't,
To thee and thine hereditary ever
And follow me, that will to some provision
in him, that with the mischief of your person it
Thou wilt o'ertake us, hence a mile or twain,
Our eldest-born, speak first.
In his own course.
No farther, sir, a man may rot even here.
To EDGAR
In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night:
Thy life's a miracle. Speak yet again.
Bless thy five wits!
by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by
not such need to hide itself. Let's see: come,
O me, my heart, my rising heart! but, down!
auricular assurance have your satisfaction, and
four-inched bridges, to course his own shadow for a
That minces virtue, and does shake the head
Her army is moved on.
'Tis true, my lords, he did.
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil:
Enter KENT
It may be so, my lord.
That all the world shall--I will do such things,--
Enter CORNWALL and EDMUND
This milky gentleness and course of yours
the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water, that in
Doth any here know me? This is not Lear:
Break, heart, I prithee, break!
This is practise, Gloucester:
'twould not ha' bin zo long as 'tis by a vortnight.
Come on, my boy: how dost, my boy? art cold?
EDGAR interposes
I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
daughters, and leave his horns without a case.
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en:
Exit an Attendant
And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
Make instruments to plague us:
Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee: there's
What like, offensive.
Upon our kingdom: if, on the tenth day following,
Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool,
By Jupiter, I swear, no.
Exit OSWALD
I prithee, put them off.
I would have made them skip: I am old now,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms,
The king hath cause to plain.
That monsters it, or your fore-vouch'd affection
what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.
you, to your rights:
May carry through itself to that full issue
your daughter.
To KENT and EDGAR
Get horses for your mistress.
most required and necessary.
To GONERIL
horses ready?
So, fare you well.
That tend upon my father?
standing pool, who is whipped from tithing to
Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
And call itself your brother.
That you must lose a husband.
But I will tarry, the fool will stay,
Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified
Not altogether so:
Let me beseech your grace not to do so:
You know not why we came to visit you,--
me like a dog, and told me I had white hairs in my
His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
That good effects may spring from words of love.
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! here's three on
You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.
He but usurp'd his life.
Exeunt KING LEAR and KENT
liars, and adulterers, by an enforced obedience of
Your servant Kent: Where is your servant Caius?
spoken, I have locked the letter in my closet:
My fool usurps my body.
The terrors of the earth. You think I'll weep
Hold your hand, my lord:
Yet Edmund was beloved:
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Our very loving sister, well be-met.
With such a number. What, must I come to you
And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
Who I'll entreat to lead me.
I thank thee, fellow, thou servest me, and I'll
Intelligent of our state, what hath been seen,
Alack, bare-headed!
My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
To this detested groom.
Sirrah, come on, go along with us.
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
And give the letters which thou find'st about me
No tearing, lady: I perceive you know it.
You fen-suck'd fogs, drawn by the powerful sun,
A herald, ho!
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Brother, a word, descend: brother, I say!
I know't, my sister's: this approves her letter,
Enter KING LEAR, fantastically dressed with wild flowers
trumpet: he is bold in his defence.'
Learn more than thou trowest,
Your most dear daughter--
so old to dote on her for any thing: I have years
Well, you may fear too far.
Than I and such a knave.
From this enormous state, seeking to give
gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I
Mend when thou canst, be better at thy leisure:
Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
Re-enter OSWALD
What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
Here, sir, but trouble him not, his wits are gone.
I'll tell thee:
I' the last night's storm I such a fellow saw,
About it, and write happy when thou hast done.
Kent! father! sisters! What, i' the storm? i' the night?
The enemy's in view, draw up your powers.
If you dare venture in your own behalf,
Save him, save him!
draw, you whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw.
tithing, and stock- punished, and imprisoned, who
O, is this he?
I can produce a champion that will prove
'Twas my duty, sir.
Alack, why thus?
To REGAN and GONERIL
Re-enter KING LEAR, with CORDELIA dead in his arms, EDGAR, Captain, and others following
Exit GLOUCESTER
Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.
Display'd so saucily against your highness,--
Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers
All ports I'll bar, the villain shall not 'scape,
Sir, by your patience,
Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
Thou shouldst have said 'Good porter, turn the key,'
Exeunt
But, by your favour,
All the power of his wits have given way to his
'Tis to be doubted, madam.
Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me,--
The messengers from our sister and the king.
My life I never held but as a pawn
Hear me, my lord,
For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down,
to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were
Enter EDGAR
Our troops set forth to-morrow: stay with us,
Fellow, I know thee.
You do climb up it now: look, how we labour.
To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,
Ha! sayest thou so?
Take him you on.
Hold thee, from this, for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
In our sustaining corn. A century send forth,
I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
Prescribe not us our duties.
Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
Let shame come when it will, I do not call it:
Denied me to come in--return, and force
My point and period will be throughly wrought,
head-piece.
To come between our sentence and our power,
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say!
I speak in understanding, you are, I know't:
No marvel, then, though he were ill affected:
Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.
not men o' their words: they told me I was every
friendship falls off, brothers divide: in
Loved as my father, as my master follow'd,
Of my condition!
I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
privily relieve him: go you and maintain talk with
Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter,
Do you smell a fault?
On thine allegiance, hear me!
I will not trouble thee, my child, farewell:
between France and him. Pray you, let's hit
Spake you with him?
Enter, with drum and colours, ALBANY, GONERIL, and Soldiers
But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
to myself, they'll be snatching. Give me an egg,
I set him there, sir: but his own disorders
They durst not do 't,
Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my chance,
To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort,
I am glad to see your highness.
will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deniest
All my reports go with the modest truth,
Cordelia leaves you: I know you what you are,
Madam, here comes my lord.
And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
That must destroy thee.
Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
In some of our best ports, and are at point
his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth
And thou art twice her love.
To answer from our home, the several messengers
O, lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
ACT I
Yes.
Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
Fool goes in
They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
I thought the king had more affected the Duke of
The bow is bent and drawn, make from the shaft.
But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
'GONERIL.'
And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim
'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend,
And hold your hands in benediction o'er me:
The untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up
For the rain it raineth every day.
Good my lord, soothe him, let him take the fellow.
To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the king,
Let him fly far:
Enter Fool
To have the expense and waste of his revenues.
Armed, brother!
That, from your first of difference and decay,
A plot upon her virtuous husband's life,
Enter CORDELIA, KENT, and Doctor
Will pack when it begins to rain,
Their papers, is more lawful.
Exit one with GLOUCESTER
I am mightily abused. I should e'en die with pity,
For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
But misery: I know 'tis from Cordelia,
None of these rogues and cowards
Right noble Burgundy,
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Shut your mouth, dame,
Are in the poorest thing superfluous:
Have you heard of no likely wars toward, 'twixt the
Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray,
The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,
Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?
Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more,
I come to cope.
am no honest man if there be any good meaning
Fetch forth the stocks!
For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
O, sir, to wilful men,
What's that?
That keep this dreadful pother o'er our heads,
Trumpet answers within
My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty
Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
Dost thou call me fool, boy?
knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up
for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman
Still, still, far wide!
Into her womb convey sterility!
O, are you free?
I look'd not for you yet, nor am provided
Grace go with you, sir!
Out, varlet, from my sight!
Nor tripped neither, you base football player.
Exit
Exeunt
business as I shall find means and acquaint you withal.
'Tis from your sister.
stuff his suspicion more fully.--I will persevere in
This is a slave, whose easy-borrow'd pride
You see, is kill'd in him: and yet it is danger
To a Gentleman, who goes out
Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak
Nothing!
I am none of these, my lord, I beseech your pardon.
Let your study
Diminish'd to her cock, her cock, a buoy
No, truly.
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Who 'twas that so endured, with his strong arms
With bur-docks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go,
have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity
That under covert and convenient seeming
As fear not but you shall,--show her this ring,
Shall pass between us: ere long you are like to hear,
Five days we do allot thee, for provision
the parings.
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Will quicken, and accuse thee: I am your host:
That, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature
Wherein I thee endow'd.
Servants bind him
Enter a Captain
The duke be here to-night? The better! best!
Is it your will? Speak, sir. Prepare my horses.
Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
Away, and let me die.
I stumbled when I saw: full oft 'tis seen,
Something he left imperfect in the
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
He is attended with a desperate train,
If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs
There's scarce a bush.
Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
Make it your cause, send down, and take my part!
Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!
And more, much more, the time will bring it out:
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
Exit CORNWALL, led by REGAN
Conspirant 'gainst this high-illustrious prince,
received a letter this night, 'tis dangerous to be
Enter OSWALD
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws,
I crave no more than what your highness offer'd,
Gone, sir: farewell.
Robes and furr'd gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
question, thou hadst well deserved it.
Half-blooded fellow, yes.
Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail
None but the fool, who labours to out-jest
And that's true too.
I took it for a man, often 'twould say
surrender of his will but offend us.
glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue,
I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad:
Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.
But other of your insolent retinue
You less know how to value her desert
must incline to the king. I will seek him, and
She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks
them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,
Pray you now, forget and forgive: I am old and foolish.
The worships of their name. O most small fault,
And I'll appear again.
Exit
They know not how their wits to wear,
Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones:
Take heed, sirrah, the whip.
Contending with the fretful element:
Strives in his little world of man to out-scorn
I may not, madam:
He that helps him take all my outward worth.
Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could--
Singing
To go out of my dialect, which you
Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
Sir, in good sooth, in sincere verity,
Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
He said it would be thus, poor banish'd man!
Yet I am doubtful for I am mainly ignorant
Am I in France?
On capital treason, and, in thine attaint,
Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister
Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail,
To EDGAR
Enter a Gentleman, with a bloody knife
Almost too small for sight: the murmuring surge,
To GONERIL
Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
brother till you can derive from him better
Fools do those villains pity who are punish'd
given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan
Angering itself and others.--Bless thee, master!
To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
When I dissuaded him from his intent,
worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet.
I never gave him any:
But love, dear love, and our aged father's right:
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
What means that bloody knife?
How now, Oswald!
Hath he never heretofore sounded you in this business?
He is gone, indeed.
Show scarce so gross as beetles: half way down
You do me wrong to take me out o' the grave:
Nothing, my lord.
To die before you please!
SCENE II. Another part of the heath. Storm still.
We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee
But not without that harmful stroke, which since
there's not a nose among twenty but can smell him
I am sure of that: and at her late being here
By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
I pardon that man's life. What was thy cause? Adultery?
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
Giving KENT money
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
I know you. Where's the king?
Be thy mouth or black or white,
Does lecher in my sight.
Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.
I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken,
So please your majesty
Half my love with him, half my care and duty:
Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what
justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark, in
How now, my pretty knave! how dost thou?
I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,
It toucheth us, as France invades our land,
'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
With mutual cunning, 'twixt Albany and Cornwall,
Throned and set high?--servants, who seem no less,
I beseech you, sir, pardon me: it is a letter
Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.
My father hath set guard to take my brother,
More sinn'd against than sinning.
No, no, my lord,
In thy just proof, repeals and reconciles thee.
She is herself a dowry.
SCENE III. A wood.
That's most certain, and with you, next month with us.
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?
Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd: I'll entreat for thee.
Be not familiar with her.
Nay, come not near th' old man, keep out, che vor
Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
And find I am alone felicitate
Sepulchring an adultress.
This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before his time.
He's coming hither: now, i' the night, i' the haste,
'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
To the Fool
The safer sense will ne'er accommodate
Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
mighty business in hand.
Why?
Of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.
Have a command to tend you?
I say, yea.
Oppressed nature sleeps:
Than twenty silly ducking observants
Horrible steep.
qualified in, and the best of me is diligence.
Catch in their fury, and make nothing of,
Enter KENT, GLOUCESTER, and EDMUND
Holla, holla!
again. The king is coming.
have him now,--and there,--and there again, and there.
Come on, sir, here's the place: stand still. How fearful
Those pelican daughters.
and says little, to fear judgment, to fight when I
Let's exchange charity.
Though well we may not pass upon his life
course, where, if you violently proceed against
Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life
And such a daughter,
His grief grew puissant and the strings of life
With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows,
For confirmation that I am much more
If thou be as poor for a subject as he is for a
Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool
Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Sir, this I hear, the king is come to his daughter,
Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude,
Hum! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
home, there's part of a power already footed: we
Fall'n into taint: which to believe of her,
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,
And let his knights have colder looks among you,
Of differences, which I least thought it fit
Poor naked wretches, whereso'er you are,
I'll answer that.
O, cry your mercy, sir.
Ready, my lord.
To temper clay. Yea, it is come to this?
On whose employment I was sent to you:
do not like the fashion of your garments: you will
I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
Thou mightst deserve, or they impose, this usage,
lord of Gloucester.
Give me your hand: you are now within a foot
That lord that counsell'd thee
Exeunt severally
before him.
Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?
Then there's life in't. Nay, if you get it, you
maintain it to be fit, that, sons at perfect age,
My father, poorly led? World, world, O world!
Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he
If but as well I other accents borrow,
To love my father all.
My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
I now perceive, it was not altogether your
Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of
Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.
The art of our necessities is strange,
But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits,
It is thy business that I go about,
We are not the first
Thou call'st on him that hates thee: it was he
For these domestic and particular broils
Bold in the quarrel's right, roused to the encounter,
cheese will do 't. There's my gauntlet, I'll prove
Exeunt
Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
Help me, help me!
Thy comforts can do me no good at all,
Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes,
You know the goodness I intend upon you:
Stands on the hourly thought.
Thine honour from thy suffering, that not know'st
'Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
both parts, thou borest thy ass on thy back o'er
He met the night-mare, and her nine-fold,
Aloof from the entire point. Will you have her?
[Rising]  Never, Regan:
No more of that.
A woman's shape doth shield thee.
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
Does not become a sword: thy great employment
Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter,
You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!
Knowing nought, like dogs, but following.
Exeunt
away, away! if you will measure your lubber's
Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.
Remembers not these garments, nor I know not
Exit
That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
By his authority I will proclaim it,
Remember to have heard: man's nature cannot carry
heavenly compulsion, knaves, thieves, and
To KENT
'Tis poor mad Tom.
Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
And let the wise man fly:
How unremoveable and fix'd he is
such dispositions as he bears, this last
Against my coming in: thou better know'st
It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,
With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
's are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself:
By her, that else will take the thing she begs,
on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!
you to suspend your indignation against my
O, let me kiss that hand!
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
[Aside]  And worse I may be yet: the worst is not
Kent, on thy life, no more.
To take the indisposed and sickly fit
He childed as I father'd! Tom, away!
Never, never, never, never, never!
so, so, so. We'll go to supper i' he morning. So, so, so.
Keep me in temper: I would not be mad!
Royal Lear,
Gives the letter to EDMUND
Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away
That all particulars of duty know,
How now! are the horses ready?
Blanket my loins: elf all my hair in knots,
'Tis his own blame, hath put himself from rest,
Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear,
His nighted life: moreover, to descry
Though I die for it, as no less is threatened me,
Thy sheep be in the corn,
Your sister is the better soldier.
That we present us to him.
And must needs taste his folly.
Smite flat the thick rotundity o' the world!
Is it but this,--a tardiness in nature
Or at their chamber-door I'll beat the drum
Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
charity, whom the foul fiend vexes: there could I
gap in your own honour, and shake in pieces the
As thou my sometime daughter.
The Fool runs out from the hovel
A father, and a gracious aged man,
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Exit EDGAR
Sound, trumpet!
No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.
Exit running, Attendants follow
I have been worth the whistle.
Than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed
To follow in a house where twice so many
Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest:
To the warm sun!
Too well, too well.
Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,
That can my speech defuse, my good intent
Be this perpetual. What says our second daughter,
sulphurous pit,
This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke
What we are come about, and by no means
ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be
Duchess of Burgundy.
I'll do 't, my lord.
SCENE I. The British camp, near Dover.
Drawing his sword
Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills,
Laying his hand on his sword
A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats, a
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
No unchaste action, or dishonour'd step,
ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
Will yield to see his daughter.
To the forfended place?
Should have him thus restrain'd.
I will preserve myself: and am bethought
Stain my man's cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,
Now let thy friendly hand
Thou losest here, a better where to find.
Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
and fathers declining, the father should be as
Enter, with drum and colours, CORDELIA, Doctor, and Soldiers
Storm still
for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
And, to deal plainly,
Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin, peace, thou fiend!
When Lear is mad. What wilt thou do, old man?
Exeunt
Fie, sir, fie!
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
Ha, ha, ha!
Crack nature's moulds, an germens spill at once,
By diligent discovery, but your haste
And, in thy best consideration, cheque
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril,
Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,
flatterer: he that beguiled you in a plain
out: wind me into him, I pray you: frame the
Why dost thou call him a knave?  What's his offence?
Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,
My services are bound. Wherefore should I
O sides, you are too tough,
And found--dispatch. The noble duke my master,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
Along with me.
Is this well spoken?
Let it be so, thy truth, then, be thy dower:
Exit Gentleman
I did commend your highness' letters to them,
Your high engender'd battles 'gainst a head
Go tell the duke and 's wife I'ld speak with them,
I, madam?
marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason,
That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble,
Sir, I thought it fit
Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
maledictions against king and nobles, needless
My lord, I know not what the matter is, but, to my
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,
I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and
Madam, within, but never man so changed.
You are a royal one, and we obey you.
To who, my lord? Who hath the office? send
He is not here.
I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness,
nuncle, and I'll give thee two crowns.
Alack, sir, he is mad.
If it be you that stir these daughters' hearts
Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
I do forgive thee.
Alas, sir, are you here? things that love night
head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in
I' the sway of your own will. Is he array'd?
For pilferings and most common trespasses
And my poor fool is hang'd! No, no, no life!
My oath, and my profession: I protest,
Enter GLOUCESTER
That it intends to do? My lord of Burgundy,
I have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy
Now, fellow, fare thee well.
him truly that will put me in trust: to love him
This shows you are above,
Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
To hovel thee with swine, and rogues forlorn,
Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness.
Than stands on any shoulder that I see
These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend
Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,
Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
But lately, very late: I loved him, friend,
Well worth a poor man's taking: fairies and gods
Yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd,
I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a
Marry, here's grace and a cod-piece, that's a wise
Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
there's no labouring i' the winter. All that follow
And with this horrible object, from low farms,
We'll no more meet, no more see one another:
Not as a brother.
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion.
My lady is bespoke.
I can scarce speak to thee, thou'lt not believe
As I have set it down.
Come, come, away.
Whereto our health is bound, we are not ourselves
Gloucester, I live
Exit
Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
My lord, when at their home
disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars: as
de, do de, do de. Bless thee from whirlwinds,
Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,
Go you, and call my fool hither.
With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
Began to crack: twice then the trumpets sounded,
Exeunt GONERIL, EDMUND, and OSWALD
Now, by Apollo,--
Opposed against the act, bending his sword
Cannot be well bestow'd.
All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.
love. Read thou this challenge, mark but the
Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, and Attendants
Exeunt KING LEAR, GLOUCESTER, KENT, and Fool
Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
When brewers mar their malt with water,
Exeunt KING LEAR, KENT, and Attendants
Keep peace, upon your lives:
Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow,
Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that
Takes a sword, and runs at him behind
Give me the map there. Know that we have divided
Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
The fishermen, that walk upon the beach,
Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach
Fiery? the fiery duke? Tell the hot duke that--
That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone for ever!
Enter EDGAR
Yet to be known shortens my made intent:
Truly, however else.
That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh
powers of the kingdom approach apace.
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,--
For him I thank your grace.
Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
And shall perchance do good: but speak you on,
Himself: what say'st thou to him?
As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a
And in the end meet the old course of death,
But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
What need one?
No squire in debt, nor no poor knight,
My father watches: O sir, fly this place,
there's money for thee.
Though that the queen on special cause is here,
not.
Stay here.
Than two tens to a score.
My sickness grows upon me.
Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
Inform her full of my particular fear,
My reason all the same, and they are ready
As to the legitimate: fine word,--legitimate!
One of them we behold.
But have you never found my brother's way
That it doth hate what gets it.
We two alone will sing like birds i' the cage:
Ay, sir, she took them, read them in my presence,
Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.
To make him even o'er the time he has lost.
And the creature run from the cur? There thou
Ride more than thou goest,
mopping and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids
He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
Giving a favour
Than now to bid you hold.
That this remotion of the duke and her
falls from bias of nature, there's father against
Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences:
How light and portable my pain seems now,
Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
Made you my guardians, my depositaries,
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile,
He's scarce awake: let him alone awhile.
When usurers tell their gold i' the field,
Exit
Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
their noses are led by their eyes but blind men, and
Be fear'd of doing harm: make your own purpose,
Of the extreme verge: for all beneath the moon
It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
Hark, do you hear the sea?
Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out,
out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen
Give but that portion which yourself proposed,
In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
Draw, you rascal: you come with letters against the
Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.
The younger rises when the old doth fall.
He cannot be such a monster--
Thy sister's naught: O Regan, she hath tied
How near's the other army?
and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions of
bitter fool and a sweet fool?
forbearance till the spied of his rage goes
No.
Hold amity? 'Tis hard, almost impossible.
And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
Tripping up his heels
Let is be so: yet have I left a daughter,
Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?
I' the mire.
O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
You taking airs, with lameness!
That eye that told you so look'd but a-squint.
Cunning.
You and your fellows, I'll have it come to question:
the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived:
But are my brother's powers set forth?
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale,
Edmund is dead, my lord.
Exit
From whom we do exist, and cease to be,
The child was bound to the father, sir, in fine,
Will not bear question, either say thou'lt do 't,
Your needful counsel to our business,
I must love you, and sue to know you better.
The fool no knave, perdy.
That have with two pernicious daughters join'd
Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart:
That of thy death and business I can tell.
With shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,
Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
All blest secrets,
[To EDMUND]  Then shall you go no further.
To the descent and dust below thy foot,
If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten
Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
like an old lecher's heart, a small spark, all the
Is man no more than this? Consider him well. Thou
I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are:
Pushes OSWALD out
But goes thy heart with this?
That thought abuses you.
So be my grave my peace, as here I give
He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.
How fell you out? say that.
Myself could else out-frown false fortune's frown.
seek him, I'll apprehend him: abominable villain!
With cheques as flatteries,--when they are seen abused.
When priests are more in word than matter,
Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.
cunning of it, I found it thrown in at the
What is't thou say'st? Her voice was ever soft,
Come to great confusion:
To ALBANY
pass. An chud ha' bin zwaggered out of my life,
Of my more fierce endeavour: I have seen drunkards
Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
With all my heart.
If on my credit you dare build so far
the king my old master must be relieved. There is
Let's see these pockets: the letters that he speaks of
Such unconstant starts are we like to have from
So many folds of favour. Sure, her offence
Enter GONERIL and EDMUND
To thee a woman's services are due:
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men
Or image of that horror?
'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
And what they may incense him to, being apt
division of the kingdom, it appears not which of
Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
between that and my blood.
A mistress's command. Wear this, spare speech,
Out, dunghill!
You are my guests: do me no foul play, friends.
slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it:
To change the course: he's full of alteration
To let him live: where he arrives he moves
following it: but the great one that goes up the
Had not concluded all. He wakes, speak to him.
Will you yet hold? How came my man i' the stocks?
And come to deadly use.
Now marry in an instant.
danger of kibes?
Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
SCENE III. The British camp near Dover.
Will presently appear,
'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
Why, no, boy, nothing can be made out of nothing.
Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give them all?
I gave you all--
And like a sister am most loath to call
Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
That's a shealed peascod.
Lear's shadow.
Here is better than the open air, take it
It did always seem so to us: but now, in the
general dependants as in the duke himself also and
Exit
finds it so.
O, here he is: lay hand upon him. Sir,
And self-reproving: bring his constant pleasure.
Than praised for harmful mildness.
O undistinguish'd space of woman's will!
I have cast off for ever: thou shalt,
We make thee lady: to thine and Albany's issue
Enter EDGAR
How's that?
This is a brave night to cool a courtezan.
the worst'?
Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the
The wonder is, he hath endured so long:
Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
Do not abuse me.
brazed to it.
Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum,
Thou must be patient, we came crying hither:
To take 't again perforce! Monster ingratitude!
would sleep till I waked him, you should half his
tailor made thee.
Come hither, captain, hark.
If she live long,
With you, goodman boy, an you please: come, I'll
And go the fools among.
That sets us all at odds: I'll not endure it:
His heart-struck injuries.
Enter GLOUCESTER, led by an Old Man
Exeunt KING OF FRANCE and CORDELIA
Exit EDGAR
I shall not be his wife.
Led him, begg'd for him, saved him from despair,
No, my good lord, I am the very man,--
when thou gavest thy golden one away. If I speak
I was forbid it.
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
Haste thee, for thy life.
O, my good lord, I have been your tenant, and
They draw and fight
owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep
Sennet. Enter KING LEAR, CORNWALL, ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, CORDELIA, and Attendants
There's my exchange:
What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister
I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
bluntly: that which ordinary men are fit for, I am
they'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou'lt
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
Affliction till it do cry out itself
But who was this?
We have this hour a constant will to publish
And every measure fail me.
Methinks I should know you, and know this man,
The injuries that they themselves procure
To Dover.
He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
my mistress' heart, and did the act of darkness with
With my two daughters' dowers digest this third:
The mysteries of Hecate, and the night,
I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,
her, swore as many oaths as I spake words, and
star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some
Let her who would be rid of him devise
rogue: for, though it be night, yet the moon
What, hath your grace no better company?
This is some fellow,
some strange thing toward, Edmund, pray you, be careful.
So please your lordship, none.
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
of France: O heavens! that this treason were not,
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Now, Edmund, where's the villain?
Allows itself to any thing.
I'll see their trial first. Bring in the evidence.
child. We have seen the best of our time:
Till noon! till night, my lord, and all night too.
carbonado your shanks: draw, you rascal, come your ways.
[Aside]  What shall Cordelia do?
That going shall be used with feet.
Naughty lady,
And of the loyal service of his son,
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The bloody proclamation to escape,
Pointing at OSWALD
Set less than thou throwest,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:
Dies
O, that way madness lies, let me shun that,
From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
Sir, I am made
Return those duties back as are right fit,
Nor no man else: all's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet,
Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia:
from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend.
Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
Nor in thine, lord.
What is the cause of thunder?
And the remainder, that shall still depend,
What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
revenue for ever, and live the beloved of your
Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
gentleman or a yeoman?
Fear me not:
Shake patiently my great affliction off:
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need,
What you have charged me with, that have I done,
Your son and daughter.
testimony of his intent, you shall run a certain
Come hither, herald,--Let the trumpet sound,
That ever I have felt.
False justicer, why hast thou let her 'scape?
I will not be, though I should win your displeasure
Yes, they have.
come unbutton here.
Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.
Wherefore to Dover, sir?
And bring some covering for this naked soul,
Are you our daughter?
it into your pocket? the quality of nothing hath
Within a fortnight!
I'll never care what wickedness I do,
No, my lord.
What place this is, and all the skill I have
SCENE V. Gloucester's castle.
To laughter and contempt, that she may feel
father will hence to-night.
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
flesh ye, come on, young master.
Help, help, O, help!
the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
Look'd black upon me, struck me with her tongue,
lose thee nothing, do it carefully. And the
Storm and tempest
Enter KENT and OSWALD, severally
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
To make thee capable.
The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
Wounds his arm
Say, how is that?
The other found out there.
I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
Take thou this note,
When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
SCENE V. Gloucester's castle.
Run, run, O, run!
And take upon's the mystery of things,
lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to
What, with the case of eyes?
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
What, is he dead?
Let me wipe it first, it smells of mortality.
Shows like a riotous inn: epicurism and lust
Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,
So, out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
Of my obscured course, and shall find time
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
To deal with grief alone.
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
Follow'd his enemy king, and did him service
Do sorely ruffle, for many miles a bout
No, I say.
Again!
Might in their working do you that offence,
Make no noise, make no noise, draw the curtains:
And leave you to attend him: some dear cause
No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour. You
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
With reservation of an hundred knights,
array. Tom's a-cold.
Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.
He smiled at it: I told him you were coming:
thy fool to lie: I would fain learn to lie.
There is my pledge,
The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
A man, a prince, by him so benefited!
First trumpet
nether-stocks.
Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
Sir, you have shown to-day your valiant strain,
Give me the letter, sir.
That ebb and flow by the moon.
Is not this your son, my lord?
thee, good man's son, from the foul fiend! five
Should many people, under two commands,
Their manners are so apish.
Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air,
Why, what canst thou tell, my boy?
Let's follow the old earl, and get the Bedlam
house is better than this rain-water out o' door.
the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
Therefore I do advise you, take this note:
You have now the good advantage of the night:
The wren goes to 't, and the small gilded fly
Yield: come before my father. Light, ho, here!
Well, well, the event.
What services canst thou do?
Enter GLOUCESTER, and Servants with torches
And the exchange my brother! Here, in the sands,
Better thou
Come, sir,
Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to
What can man's wisdom
Of this remove.
these injuries the king now bears will be revenged
In the restoring his bereaved sense?
I love thee not.
Pillicock sat on Pillicock-hill:
I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund,
keep thy word justly, swear not, commit not with
not have made him so ill, though he had been but two
I'll go with thee:
Save thee, Curan.
Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy drum?
O pity! Sir, where is the patience now,
No more of that, I have noted it well. Go you, and
Who put my man i' the stocks?
discommend so much. I know, sir, I am no
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
Then comes the time, who lives to see't,
Strive to be interess'd, what can you say to draw
And show the heavens more just.
Dear sir, forbear.
Call not your stocks for me: I serve the king,
Pursue him, ho! Go after.
So the fool follows after.
Thou didst not know on't. Who comes here? O heavens,
What safe and nicely I might well delay
When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
To bear it tamely, touch me with noble anger,
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
To the Fool
O you kind gods,
That's sorry yet for thee.
Ask her forgiveness?
That wants the means to lead it.
A royal nobleness: I must embrace thee:
treachers, by spherical predominance, drunkards,
How chance the king comes with so small a train?
Be your tears wet? yes, 'faith. I pray, weep not:
To take the basest and most poorest shape
Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
pretence of danger.
Is 't not the king?
Enter GLOUCESTER and EDMUND
To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now:
Let go, slave, or thou diest!
Sick, O, sick!
More richer than my tongue.
We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend,
If your honour judge it meet, I will place you
Come, help to bear thy master,
For, as I am a man, I think this lady
To GONERIL
Till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks!
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
She's dead as earth. Lend me a looking-glass,
your letter.
And by the happy hollow of a tree
My master calls me, I must not say no.
I'd shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?
Exeunt
fie, fie! pah, pah! Give me an ounce of civet,
Peace, Kent!
Thy safety being the motive.
How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind:
Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
then am I the prisoner, and his bed my goal, from
A man, sir.
that hath laid knives under his pillow, and halters
Is done to cure it.
Where is the villain, Edmund?
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
and 'no' to every thing that I said!--'Ay' and 'no'
Knows he the wickedness?
Got 'tween the lawful sheets.
unbolted villain into mortar, and daub the wall of
Upon my hateful life: another way,
Storm still
Not fear still to be taken: I know his heart.
Good king, that must approve the common saw,
Exit EDMUND
May equally determine.
Pur! the cat is gray.
With plumed helm thy slayer begins threats,
Dost thou know me, fellow?
I know your lady does not love her husband,
mightst behold the great image of authority: a
Whose face between her forks presages snow,
prediction, there's son against father: the king
If you do find him, pray you, give him this,
What dost thou profess? what wouldst thou with us?
That he's so slightly valued in his messenger,
To the Fool
Prithee, go in thyself: seek thine own ease:
The which he lacks, that to provoke in him,
What art thou?
But where the greater malady is fix'd,
Come, come, when saw you my father last?
judgment, your highness is not entertained with that
His mind so venomously, that burning shame
Enter OSWALD
Hang him instantly.
Hear me, recreant!
'Tis known before, our preparation stands
kind o' thing than a fool: and yet I would not be
Good sir, to the purpose.
When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down,
To wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it,
Ay, my good lord.
Exit
To avert your liking a more worthier way
Was then scarce friends with him: I have heard
See better, Lear, and let me still remain
Pluck out his eyes.
I would not take this from report, it is,
Madman and beggar too.
Thou must not stay behind.
ACT V
little: he always loved our sister most, and
accent was a plain knave, which for my part
This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel,
Yet have I left a daughter.
How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus
shall get it with running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.
Flourish. Enter ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, another Captain, and Soldiers
If all could so become it.
I am scarce in breath, my lord.
Now outlaw'd from my blood, he sought my life,
Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about, the
I shall no leading need.
Exit
Then, prithee, get thee gone: if, for my sake,
I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote
Exeunt all but KENT and Gentleman
And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
Against my fire, and wast thou fain, poor father,
For that I am some twelve or fourteen moon-shines
I know you do not love me, for your sisters
Away, old man, give me thy hand, away!
Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea,
Reverbs no hollowness.
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
at suit of his gray beard,--
What kind of help?
Come, my fair Cordelia.
out, when Lady the brach may stand by the fire and stink.
O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
Good sir,--
Hear, nature, hear, dear goddess, hear!
Improper for a slave.
The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a
So am I purposed.
You owe me no subscription: then let fall
Now, where's your master'?
Ay, sir.
Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
Help, ho! murder! murder!
Draw thy sword,
by a divine thrusting on: an admirable evasion
There is nothing done, if he return the conqueror:
These hairs, which thou dost ravish from my chin,
If more, the more thou hast wrong'd me.
O, sir, are you come?
Is it a beggar-man?
Yours in the ranks of death.
By your allowance, which if you should, the fault
For the sound man. Death on my state! wherefore
Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And read out this.
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
Methinks thy voice is alter'd, and thou speak'st
Do you busy yourself about that?
And thereto add such reasons of your own
Take heed o' the foul fiend: obey thy parents,
What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
Ere they shall make us weep: we'll see 'em starve
You are much more attask'd for want of wisdom
on my back forty eight.
Return to her, and fifty men dismiss'd?
Come, boy.
No, since.
major, so that it follows, I am rough and
Most serpent-like, upon the very heart:
How does the king?
If, till the expiration of your month,
Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
Women will all turn monsters.
No words, no words: hush.
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Methought thy very gait did prophesy
Bind fast his corky arms.
And in conclusion to oppose the bolt
Their precious stones new lost: became his guide,
Spoke, with how manifold and strong a bond
He hath commission from thy wife and me
[Reads]  'This policy and reverence of age makes
I know thee well: a serviceable villain,
This admiration, sir, is much o' the savour
A spirit, a spirit: he says his name's poor Tom.
Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
Your name, fair gentlewoman?
A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou 'No,'
To be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid.
I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The
May have the due note of him, and of my land,
Enter KING LEAR, Fool, and Gentleman
I threaten'd to discover him: he replied,
Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a
Nay, then--
Hast heavy substance, bleed'st not, speak'st, art sound.
If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in
I cannot daub it further.
By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn:
The country gives me proof and precedent
'Tis the infirmity of his age: yet he hath ever
To CORDELIA
Importune him once more to go, my lord,
Ha!
Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly,
To the Fool
All hearts against us: Edmund, I think, is gone,
SCENE II. Before ALBANY's palace.
Says suum, mun, ha, no, nonny.
If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee
S. Withold footed thrice the old,
And you, sir. I have been with your father, and
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent
Enter GONERIL
father compounded with my mother under the
No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son,
Storm still. Enter KENT and a Gentleman, meeting
SCENE III. Gloucester's castle.
Most barbarous, most degenerate! have you madded.
Hadst not been born than not to have pleased me better.
Exit
That ever penury, in contempt of man,
Reads
Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers,
Let me ask you one word in private.
Would he deny his letter? I never got him.
A credulous father! and a brother noble,
[To EDMUND]  Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.
From a full-flowing stomach. General,
Himself in person there?
the least syllable of thy addition.
Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
or not I the detector!
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
Looks fearfully in the confined deep:
at curfew, and walks till the first cock, he gives
By day and night he wrongs me, every hour
To make thee seek it.'
The good-years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
Whilst I was big in clamour came there in a man,
To apply to his bleeding face. Now, heaven help him!
I do beseech your grace,--
Be govern'd by your knowledge, and proceed
Yes, madam.
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
Or with this paper shall I stop it: Hold, sir:
The oldest hath borne most: we that are young
slower, and, as I say, retire with me to my
This coronet part betwixt you.
What news?
Like monsters of the deep.
Why art thou angry?
Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast
Giving the crown
A trumpet sounds
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
Not met us on the way.
Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk
And what confederacy have you with the traitors
So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester!
As badness would desire.
For there was never yet fair woman but she made
Full suddenly he fled.
it were his, but, in respect of that, I would
flown, bird! i' the clout, i' the clout: hewgh!
gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think
We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee: mark.
This is above all strangeness.
He that will think to live till he be old,
Which are to France the spies and speculations
An they will take it, so, if not, he's plain.
Late footed in the kingdom?
Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
My masters, know you that.
How now! What's the matter?
slave, strike.
A servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,
Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
Re-enter EDMUND
My snuff and loathed part of nature should
Look, where he stands and glares!
Points to his heart
Bringing the murderous coward to the stake,
what in the world he is
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Re-enter Knight
Pass.
Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:
Sweet-heart, see, they bark at me.
He had no other death's-man. Let us see:
Hath pluck'd him after.
To your professed bosoms I commit him
There is means, madam:
The best and soundest of his time hath been but
Ha! Goneril, with a white beard! They flattered
Nor will you tender less.
Do you not love my sister?
Now, gods, stand up for bastards!
Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.
And thou must make a dullard of the world,
Tom hath been scared out of his good wits: bless
Our potency made good, take thy reward.
I thank you, sir: that's all.
How now! what art thou?
The true blank of thine eye.
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
The king is mad: how stiff is my vile sense,
Upon this call o' the trumpet.
dog's obeyed in office.
Exeunt
Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
Are as the time is: to be tender-minded
May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother,
horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
And art thou come to this?
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
To give away thy land,
On flickering Phoebus' front,--
How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
And yet not so, since, I am sure, my love's
That dotage gives it.
Alack, 'tis he: why, he was met even now
The battle done, and they within our power,
upon your traitorous father are not fit for your
This shameful lodging.
This man hath had good counsel:--a hundred knights!
Or ere I'll weep. O fool, I shall go mad!
I would have all well betwixt you.
Instantly know, and of that letter too:
him as this of Kent's banishment.
ACT IV
thine ear: change places, and, handy-dandy, which
We could control them. If you will come to me,--
Upon thy foul disease. Revoke thy doom,
That nature, which contemns its origin,
and waiting-women. So, bless thee, master!
Confined to exhibition! All this done
Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the
I did her wrong--
most nearly appertains to us both. I think our
My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
And turn his sleep to wake.
Striking him
If ever I return to you again,
many opportunities to cut him off: if your will
You know the fiery quality of the duke,
True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.
He flashes into one gross crime or other,
Whose mind and mine, I know, in that are one,
Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,
No, no, they would not.
Against their father, fool me not so much
Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors:
the dukes he values most, for equalities are so
You know the character to be your brother's?
Go you, call hither my fool.
I never shall endure her: dear my lord,
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Ay, boy.
him, nor any way sustain him.
And make them keep their caves: since I was man,
Do comfort and not burn. 'Tis not in thee
king, and take vanity the puppet's part against the
The ways are dangerous.
Advise yourself.
The affliction nor the fear.
good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination:
Horns within
Over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
A babe to honour her! If she must teem,
If this man come to good.
Either his notion weakens, his discernings
[Reads]  'If any man of quality or degree within
For wise men are grown foppish,
That I may speak: I'll write straight to my sister,
Never,--O fault!--reveal'd myself unto him,
I do serve you in this business.
unhappily, as of unnaturalness between the child
'Tis the times' plague, when madmen lead the blind.
For those that mingle reason with your passion
figure: I am better than thou art now, I am a fool,
Could never plant in me.
But in my garments.
Your graces are right welcome.
Into a madman's rags, to assume a semblance
For which I razed my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,
Losses their remedies. All weary and o'erwatch'd,
The bodies of GONERIL and REGAN are brought in
Fools had ne'er less wit in a year,
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
To-morrow, or at further space, to appear
Enter a Messenger
diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation
Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception: I
Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove
Come, good Athenian.
A fox, when one has caught her,
The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
Until some half-hour past, when I was arm'd:
Albany than Cornwall.
And dotage terms so.
Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound
Why, for taking one's part that's out of favour:
By some discretion, that discerns your state
As he'ld burst heaven, threw him on my father,
If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there afore you.
with no eyes. Look with thine ears: see how yond
Kneeling
Briefly thyself remember: the sword is out
Tearing off his clothes
Exeunt all but ALBANY and EDGAR
And put upon him such a deal of man,
That we the pain of death would hourly die
about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that
Why, fool?
Looking on KENT
As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear,
And her troth plight,
True or false, it hath made thee earl of
loves him. Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him
The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
No, do not.
stealing, Modo, of murder, Flibbertigibbet, of
brought it?
My very character,--I'ld turn it all
To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts,
That it's had it head bit off by it young.
Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!
crow-keeper: draw me a clothier's yard. Look,
Let's then determine
And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend:
Which they will make an obedient father.
honourable friend.
I might have saved her, now she's gone for ever!
Throwing down a glove
Peace be with Burgundy!
Made you no more offence but what you speak of?
So many fathom down precipitating,
Giving a paper
Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd,
Who is conductor of his people?
Not a word.
Tripp'd me behind, being down, insulted, rail'd,
Give the word.
And know themselves and you.
No, I will be the pattern of all patience,
found 'em, there I smelt 'em out. Go to, they are
Cannot be seen or heard: do but look up.
thou art nothing.
Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!
Might have the freer course.
twinkled on my bastardizing. Edgar--
Let go my hand.
None.
That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
If my cap would buy a halter:
His fault is much, and the good king his master
Madam, do you, 'tis fittest.
That thou so oft have boasted to retain?
The knave turns fool that runs away,
That we may wake the king: he hath slept long.
That justly think'st, and hast most rightly said!
Must be of such unnatural degree,
[Aside]  I had rather lose the battle than that sister
'Tis politic and safe to let him keep
A plague-sore, an embossed carbuncle,
The arbitrement is like to be bloody. Fare you
The sweet and bitter fool
Put strength enough to't.
Why, art thou mad, old fellow?
That hast within thee undivulged crimes,
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable,
my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore
From her material sap, perforce must wither
[Aside]  If I find him comforting the king, it will
Lady, I am not well, else I should answer
And thou shalt have more
All dark and comfortless. Where's my son Edmund?
He knows not what he says: and vain it is
To be such men as may besort your age,
Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Look there, look there!
thou wast born with.
You shall have any thing.
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Into this scatter'd kingdom, who already,
ruinous disorders, follow us disquietly to our
But yet I call you servile ministers,
A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue
Mean you to enjoy him?
ACT III
Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak,
of Kent in Germany.
Madam, sleeps still.
Which are too intrinse t' unloose, smooth every passion
In, boy, go first. You houseless poverty,--
More composition and fierce quality
This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet: he begins
I serve you, madam:
Enter GONERIL
Fellow, where goest?
No contraries hold more antipathy
Their going hence, even as their coming hither,
Makest thou this shame thy pastime?
No.
Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst
I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny
How now, brother Edmund! what serious
Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.
He'll strike, and quickly too: he's dead and rotten.
beard ere the black ones were there. To say 'ay'
food for thee.
To KENT
Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st,
To let these hands obey my blood,
[To GONERIL]  Detested kite! thou liest.
I thank you, sir.
Put on what weary negligence you please,
And when 'tis told, O, that my heart would burst!
To him our absolute power:
But mice and rats, and such small deer,
Who gives any thing to poor Tom? whom the foul
brother's evil disposition made him seek his death,
Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable:
Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove:
His answer was 'The worse:' of Gloucester's treachery,
That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.'
Service.
Never, my lord: but I have heard him oft
You look as you had something more to say.
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Exit
it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well
With boot, and such addition as your honours
casement of my closet.
No cause, no cause.
Halloo, halloo, loo, loo!
Sister, you'll go with us?
He'll shape his old course in a country new.
Her boat hath a leak,
hours at the trade.
Please you, draw near. Louder the music there!
Above the rest, be gone.
Winter's not gone yet, if the wild-geese fly that way.
forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings!
Edmund, farewell.
Exeunt
Stand in hard cure.
He would not!
Enter, in conquest, with drum and colours, EDMUND,  KING LEAR and CORDELIA, prisoners, Captain, Soldiers,  and c
But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
Fathers that wear rags
Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,
Not I	pray you, what are they?
What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,
nothing, nuncle?
The head and he shall louse,
I was contracted to them both: all three
From those that she calls servants or from mine?
His way to Dover.
you are o' the commission,
I dare avouch it, sir: what, fifty followers?
And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.
Madam, with much ado:
I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,
By your eyes' anguish.
the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps
Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and
This office to you.
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
[Kneeling]  O you mighty gods!
But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year
Second trumpet
wisdom? so.
care for me.
We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
Putting up the letter
With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
man's sworn spouse, set not thy sweet heart on proud
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
Slave, thou hast slain me: villain, take my purse:
And dizzy 'tis, to cast one's eyes so low!
At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,
I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
Which I must needs call mine: thou art a boil,
Set me where you stand.
Well, madam.
Upon the gad! Edmund, how now! what news?
'Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,
Good my lord,
Singing
Who redeems nature from the general curse
That still would manage those authorities
Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
to breed it in?--When came this to you? who
To seal the accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes,
Rive your concealing continents, and cry
I'll do't before I speak,--that you make known
Desire him to go in, trouble him no more
Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
If you come slack of former services,
Away! the foul fiend follows me!
To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
Stop, stop! No help?
Ay.
Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.
Draw, seem to defend yourself, now quit you well.
him: and at my entreaty forbear his presence
Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy
No.
penning of it.
'Tis hot, it smokes,
Dinner, ho, dinner! Where's my knave? my fool?
So long as we can say  'This is the worst.'
To his dog-hearted daughters, these things sting
Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind:
How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.
I doubt not of his temperance.
Third trumpet
We must do something, and i' the heat.
Shall of a corn cry woe,
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch: one whom I
So young, and so untender?
I shall attend you presently at your tent.
Which twain have brought her to.
And, from the extremest upward of thy head
Stands in some rank of praise.
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
[Aside]  And yet I must.--Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
Unburthen'd crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
fiends have been in poor Tom at once, of lust, as
O my dear father! Restoration hang
Exeunt
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
No, by mine honour, madam.
That way, I'll this,--he that first lights on him
She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,
Let me unseal the letter.
That made the overture of thy treasons to us,
scourged by the sequent effects: love cools,
well, sir.
Is your lady come?
Would with his daughter speak, commands her service:
Ay, my good lord, 'twas he inform'd against him,
That we our largest bounty may extend
In honour'd love.
If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
No.
His countenance likes me not.
As mad as the vex'd sea, singing aloud,
Thee o'er to harshness: her eyes are fierce, but thine
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need,--
till some little time hath qualified the heat of
Enter EDMUND, and CURAN meets him
Enter KING LEAR, KENT, and Fool
Who alone suffers suffers most i' the mind,
not in the contents.
Sir, being his knave, I will.
Good my lord, enter here.
The images of revolt and flying off.
Would not 'scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
Speak, Edmund, where's the king? and where's Cordelia?
Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
This sword of mine shall give them instant way,
In my rights,
may be ready for our apprehension.
Go to, say you nothing. There's a division betwixt
Take her, or leave her?
We will greet the time.
I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
Enter EDGAR and GLOUCESTER
In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee,
I hold you but a subject of this war,
What, did my father's godson seek your life?
When the rash mood is on.
My lord and master.
Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor
So may it come, thy master, whom thou lovest,
The untented woundings of a father's curse
Ay, every inch a king:
To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
Before me at this instant.
Thy half o' the kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
Make thy words faith'd? No: what I should deny,--
Sought to be king o'er her.
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well, then,
cities, mutinies, in countries, discord, in
What are you?
To have well-armed friends.
which I would fain call master.
Out of my sight!
Beating him
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
Touches us not with pity.
For which thou whipp'st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
Enter GONERIL, and OSWALD, her steward
At your choice, sir.
Return you to my sister.
In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
Alack, poor gentleman!
And am fall'n out with my more headier will,
Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a
Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame,
An turn our impress'd lances in our eyes
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
'My lady's father'! my lord's knave: your
hare-lip, mildews the white wheat, and hurts the
Most savage and unnatural!
Exeunt
Give me thy hand. Who's there?
And so I am, I am.
Told him my pilgrimage: but his flaw'd heart,
How now! where's that mongrel?
Although as yet the face of it be cover'd
kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.
Who is it that can tell me who I am?
Shall never see his pardon, for my state
Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured
Thou'ldst meet the bear i' the mouth. When the
look, a mouse! Peace, peace, this piece of toasted
And bawds and whores do churches build,
And desperately are dead.
Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.
this other day, what should follow these eclipses.
Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
Speak less than thou knowest,
O thou side-piercing sight!
I must change arms at home, and give the distaff
Come place him here by me,
Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less,
The bounty and the benison of heaven
When my dimensions are as well compact,
Where is he?
Requires a fitter place.
Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path. Poor
Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GONERIL, EDMUND, and Servants
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
KENT is set at liberty
'Thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think,
And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
That stretch their duties nicely.
I know not, madam: 'tis too bad, too bad.
Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
The moment is thy death. Away! by Jupiter,
An unknown opposite, thou art not vanquish'd,
I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered
But fathers that bear bags
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER and KENT
The news is not so tart.--I'll read, and answer.
Pull off my boots: harder, harder: so.
Enter KING LEAR, KENT, and Fool
My truth and honour firmly.
Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may 'scape,
REGAN plucks his beard
Sound!
tell my daughter I would speak with her.
though this knave came something saucily into the
Flourish. Re-enter GLOUCESTER, with KING OF FRANCE, BURGUNDY, and Attendants
To such as love not sorrow, but another,
and heard, but faintly, nothing like the image
Exit an Officer
Nothing: I have sworn, I am firm.
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.
He hath no daughters, sir.
There's hell, there's darkness, there's the
Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go
What's he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?
Thou robed man of justice, take thy place,
But now her price is fall'n. Sir, there she stands:
I know not, lady.
here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool.
And thou hadst been set i' the stocks for that
Not to be over-ruled. Idle old man,
Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you,
rest on's body cold. Look, here comes a walking fire.
All levied in my name, have in my name
Have more than thou showest,
Very well.
Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods,
Life and death! I am ashamed
Something--I know not what: I'll love thee much,
She and the duke her husband!
A plague upon your epileptic visage!
With robbers' hands my hospitable favours
Who is too good to pity thee.
No, I'll not weep:
Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.
No, lad, teach me.
He hath been out nine years, and away he shall
Enter a Gentleman, with Attendants
Than I have here proclaim'd thee.
No less in space, validity, and pleasure,
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
He faints! My lord, my lord!
That's my fear. I pray you, have a continent
Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,--
Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
Until their greater pleasures first be known
I'll lead you to some biding.
I kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
What trumpet's that?
I will say nothing.
Of the self-same metal that my sister is,
Enter EDMUND, with a letter
Alarums. They fight. EDMUND falls
As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods.
She's there, and she is yours.
I'ld say I had eyes again!
Nothing will come of nothing: speak again.
Be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and relieved,
Brought near to beast: my face I'll grime with filth,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me:
Darest thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence,
Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad,
Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master:
nightingale. Hopdance cries in Tom's belly for two
All thy other titles thou hast given away, that
Both, both, my lord.
According to my bond, nor more nor less.
Canst thou blame him?
And in the most exact regard support
Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.
And pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old
Exeunt
This weaves itself perforce into my business.
a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the
Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires,
Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
The same,
Be comforted, good madam: the great rage,
Take you some company, and away to horse:
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways, not
Lest that the infection of his fortune take
'Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou
the dirt: thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown,
o' the coxcombs with a stick, and cried 'Down,
Exit
He that conceals him, death.
Exit
Come hither, friend: where is the king my master?
Not in this land shall he remain uncaught,
Read.
Storm still
Because they are not eight?
When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
Who's there, besides foul weather?
Pray you, undo this button: thank you, sir.
Of this child-changed father!
Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
And here are to be answer'd. Tell me, my daughters,--
Beneath is all the fiends',
With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart,
My wits begin to turn.
Methinks the ground is even.
See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
Are punish'd with: the king must take it ill,
So distribution should undo excess,
O the blest gods! so will you wish on me,
royalty of her father: draw, you rogue, or I'll so
Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My
Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.
For you, great king,
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
Brother, I advise you to the best, go armed: I
Be to content your lord, who hath received you
so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now I am
Ripeness is all: come on.
Wherein we must have use of your advice:
Let the great gods,
Exeunt
That which my father loses, no less than all:
Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain:
And Regan with him: have you nothing said
Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent, who in disguise
with thee.
You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.
Therefore great France
That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.
To bid my king and master aye good night:
So may it be, indeed:
Witness the world, that I create thee here
No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour,
This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared
And not send back my messenger.
Enter ALBANY
over-lusty at legs, then he wears wooden
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Most sure and vulgar: every one hears that,
hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave, a
Blows in your face. I fear your disposition:
With five and twenty, Regan? said you so?
Repose you there, while I to this hard house--
Go after her: she's desperate, govern her.
out the villain Gloucester.
soft music playing, Gentleman, and others attending.
And, from some knowledge and assurance, offer
Call by thy trumpet: he that dares approach,
Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
You we first seize on.
Election makes not up on such conditions.
Ch'ill pick your teeth, zir: come, no matter vor
and for so much as I have perused, I find it not
So much commend itself, you shall be ours:
You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred, only I
Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
That he suspects none: on whose foolish honesty
She hath abated me of half my train,
SCENE VII. A tent in the French camp. LEAR on a bed asleep,
Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would
Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters' blessing:
Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back
Exeunt other Servants
I hear my father coming: pardon me:
Stay yet, hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
Will cheque him for 't: your purposed low correction
So, farewell to you both.
hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man
I will talk further with you.
through ford and whirlipool e'er bog and quagmire,
great abatement of kindness appears as well in the
Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
Should sure to the slaughter,
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
What say you to the lady? Love's not love
And not from one opposed.
Appear like mice, and yond tall anchoring bark,
[Aside]              One way I like this well,
That can make vile things precious. Come,
Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter,
Is such as basest and contemned'st wretches
Woe, that too late repents,--
Exit
Post speedily to my lord your husband, show him
lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this
Give me your hand: have you no more to say?
It is the stars,
By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
Who, with some other of the lords dependants,
Sir, I shall study deserving.
The food of thy abused father's wrath!
And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
Do.
thee, nuncle, thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides,
Which I must act: briefness and fortune, work!
He did bewray his practise, and received
Good morrow to you both.
Hark, the duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.
By me invested, he compeers the best.
She will taste as like this as a crab does to a
None at all.
None does offend, none, I say, none, I'll able 'em:
Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she foxes!
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
ear, bloody of hand, hog in sloth, fox in stealth,
Methinks you are too much of late i' the frown.
To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
towards you: I have told you what I have seen
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits,
I do remember now: henceforth I'll bear
To shake all cares and business from our age,
And with presented nakedness out-face
Truth's a dog must to kennel, he must be whipped
Yields to the theft: had he been where he thought,
Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,
the dukes, and a worse matter than that: I have
supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here?
Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
I would not from your love make such a stray,
Darkness and devils!
my hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the lust of
Hast thou given all to thy two daughters?
Gloucester's eye!
I will die bravely, like a bridegroom. What!
and did the third a blessing against his will, if
So please you,--
They'll mar my counterfeiting.
Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
Well pray you, father.
How now! where's the king?
rash, then must we look to receive from his age,
I'll overtake you. Speak.
Hasten his musters and conduct his powers:
Then, I prithee, be merry, thy wit shall ne'er go
Throwing down a glove
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
Fare thee well.
For following her affairs. Put in his legs.
of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish
Is now urged on you.
To use his eyes for garden water-pots,
the place for your labour.
Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
I cannot conceive you.
So young, my lord, and true.
Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead:
know you the reason?
Thy token of reprieve.
No, but not yet: may be he is not well:
Drum afar off
'Tis best to give him way, he leads himself.
And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
Bind him, I say.
Thou'dst shiver'd like an egg: but thou dost breathe,
When every case in law is right,
They could not, would not do 't, 'tis worse than murder,
Mark, I say, instantly, and carry it so
What was the offence you gave him?
Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
You have begot me, bred me, loved me: I
Storm still
approves him an intelligent party to the advantages
Was this before the king return'd?
the harder: ch'ill be plain with you.
Deserved much less advancement.
if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.
My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night:
Cannot be border'd certain in itself,
But cozen'd and beguiled.
Old fools are babes again, and must be used
'Tis most convenient, pray you, go with us.
o with me to the duchess.
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practise:
That, when we have found the king,--in which your pain
SCENE IV. The same. A tent.
Do thou for him stand:
Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
No, my lord.
You strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble
when we are sick in fortune,--often the surfeit
You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons,
Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
Enter KING LEAR and Fool
With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
Even so. Cover their faces.
If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
if we were villains by necessity, fools by
with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.
Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed
Will they return?
Her amber hair for foul hath amber quoted.
yours, and welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
If this austere insociable life
Therefore meet.
Thy news Boyet?
More calf, certain.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace!
The third he caper'd, and cried, 'All goes well,'
What, are there but three?
Enter LONGAVILLE, with a paper
the happiness of life.
When, lo! to interrupt my purposed rest,
Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue,
cuckoo. Ver, begin.
That same Biron I'll torture ere I go:
Come when the king doth to my lady come,
three ages since: but I think now 'tis not to be
argument in,
minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a
Celestial as thou art, O, pardon, love, this wrong,
DON
SCENE II. The same.
O that I knew he were but in by the week!
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
I was, fair madam.
The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt, I go
The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.
DON
It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion the
Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet
Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill,
Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.
Ay, and in a brooch of lead.
Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense of hearing.
Do we not likewise see our learning there?
This was no damsel, neither, sir, she was a virgin.
telling true, but so.
Satis quod sufficit.
That some plain man recount their purposes
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
That, by and by, disguised they will be here.
Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
which with,--O, with--but with this I passion to say
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.
For this damsel, I must keep her at the park: she
Juno but an Ethiope were,
A holy parcel of the fairest dames.
Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
SCENE I. The same.
Neither entitled in the other's heart.
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
Ovidius Naso was the man: and why, indeed, Naso,
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
And Longaville was for my service born.
Through the velvet leaves the wind,
Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?
And ever and anon they made a doubt
Gave Hector a gift,--
Or pricket sore, or else sorel, the people fall a-hooting.
A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,
by reckoning, sir.
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Go, bid them prepare.
The measure then of one is easily told.
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
That's hereby.
DON
And give him light that it was blinded by.
Signior Arme--Arme--commends you. There's villany
will prove those verses to be very unlearned,
Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve,
DON
[Reads]
Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
For the rest of the Worthies?--
You must not be so quick.
Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
[To COSTARD]  Ah, you whoreson loggerhead! you were
of languages, and stolen the scraps.
Sing, boy, my spirit grows heavy in love.
Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these.
but for smelling out the odouriferous flowers of
The sweet war-man is dead and rotten, sweet chucks,
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
And utters it again when God doth please:
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years, take this key,
Much upon this it is: and might not you
As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
beat not the bones of the buried: when he breathed,
What is a remuneration?
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
Command me any service to her thither?
I, that am honest, I, that hold it sin
Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
And plant in tyrants mild humility.
cannot enjoy her.
His eye begets occasion for his wit,
Are number'd in the travel of one mile?
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
Then leave this chat, and, good Biron, now prove
SCENE II. The same.
An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
And they, well mock'd, depart away with shame.
It shall suffice me: at which interview
Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
The head of a bodkin.
To see him kiss his hand! and how most sweetly a'
[Reads]  'So it is, besieged with sable-coloured
Than you much willing to be counted wise
By heart and in heart, boy.
Look what you do, you do it still i' the dark.
Although not valued to the money's worth.
We cannot cross the cause why we were born,
Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! a little scratch'd,
It is not for prisoners to be too silent in their
crushest the snake!' that is the way to make an
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice,
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
beseech your society.
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
beggar: who overcame he? the beggar. The
You will do aught, this shall you do for me:
I say lead is slow.
From my lord to my lady.
And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
end of our show.
Construe my speeches better, if you may.
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
from Don Armado: I beseech you, read it.
Dumain was at my service, and his sword:
And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France,
Exeunt
prosperity! Affliction may one day smile again, and
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
Gathering up the pieces
This afternoon.
Marvellous well for the pen.
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
Some say a sore, but not a sore, till now made
Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits:
female, or, for thy more sweet understanding, a
Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
eye,--by this light, but for her eye, I would not
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
But tell me, how was there a costard broken in a shin?
Beauteous as ink, a good conclusion.
We bend to that the working of the heart,
I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
Dumain transform'd! four woodcocks in a dish!
Take that for your fair lady.
Well-liking wits they have, gross, gross, fat, fat.
If your ladyship would say, 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
I post from love: good lover, let me go.
I would forget her, but a fever she
my l'envoy.
Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
DON
I say, sing.
Nor understood none neither, sir.
Why, will shall break it, will and nothing else.
Will these turtles be gone?
And lady-smocks all silver-white
Here comes Navarre.
As upright as the cedar.
Full of strange shapes, of habits and of forms,
To her will, sir, or so.
Who is the suitor? who is the suitor?
Draws out his table-book
doublet like a rabbit on a spit, or your hands in
Three thousand times within this three years' space,
The letter is too long by half a mile.
DON
And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance,
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
I beseech your grace, let this letter be read:
Do the wise think them other? is not l'envoy a salve?
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Now fair befall your mask!
For every object that the one doth catch
You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.
That are recorded in this schedule here:
DON
lady, dart thy skill at me,
The sinewy vigour of the traveller.
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn,
Under the cool shade of a sycamore
Dies in the zeal of that which it presents:
And abstinence engenders maladies.
The very all of all is,--but, sweet heart, I do
Fair weather after you!
His leg is too big for Hector's.
And milk comes frozen home in pail,
My red dominical, my golden letter:
That was the way to make his godhead wax,
DON
'Tis more than need.
Pell-mell, down with them! but be first advised,
and therefore too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier.
outswear Cupid. Comfort, me, boy: what great men
ACT IV
When blood is nipp'd and ways be foul,
Though so denied fair harbour in my house.
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend,
These are complements, these are humours, these
Because thou hast no face.
our assistants, at the king's command, and this most
thy love? I could: shall I entreat thy love? I
To those that make us both,--fair ladies, you:
Pray you, sir, whose daughter?
Thou bid'st me beg: this begging is not strange.
I love not to be crossed.
DON
I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.
own part, I am, as they say, but to parfect one man
overcame, three. Who came? the king: why did he
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
You may not come, fair princess, in my gates,
DON
The king and his companions: warily
You three, Biron, Dumain, and Longaville,
he was a man. But I will forward with my device.
What?
For where is any author in the world
His loving bosom to keep down his heart.
That give a name to every fixed star
That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess:
sir, will show whereuntil it doth amount: for mine
Quare chirrah, not sirrah?
girl, and therefore welcome the sour cup of
Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here
At the first opening of the gorgeous east,
is two months on her way.
Define, define, well-educated infant.
And go we, lords, to put in practise that
His face's own margent did quote such amazes
true, that thou art beauteous, truth itself, that
Biron is one of the votaries with the king, and here
Unpleasing to a married ear!
One whom the music of his own vain tongue
We arrest your word.
Above their functions and their offices.
The music plays, vouchsafe some motion to it.
Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
But there are other strict observances,
Why tough senior? why tough senior?
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
as the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in
Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
For the ass to the Jude, give it him:--Jud-as, away!
in flesh and blood.
Enter COSTARD
Novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
Why, all his behaviors did make their retire
A very beadle to a humorous sigh,
One drunkard loves another of the name.
To fast, to study, and to see no woman,
Hercules, the pedant, Judas Maccabaeus: And if
No.
Via, goodman Dull! thou hast spoken no word all this while.
And Rosaline they call her: ask for her,
I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance, and,
For native blood is counted painting now,
I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
DON
DON
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
I know not, but I think it was not he.
For still her cheeks possess the same
As it shall follow in my correction: and God defend
It must be done this afternoon.
Why tender juvenal? why tender juvenal?
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
The which I hope is not enrolled there,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know:
That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make
shoulder, and with his royal finger, thus, dally
The French king's daughter with yourself to speak--
charge-house on the top of the mountain?
Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now:
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
Faith so infringed, which such zeal did swear?
Say, can you fast? your stomachs are too young,
To BOYET
A domineering pedant o'er the boy,
They are infected, in their hearts it lies,
DON
With groaning wretches, and your task shall be,
estimation.'
To DULL
Four days ago.
inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech thee,
True, out indeed.
Reads
And such barren plants are set before us, that we
True.
I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once,
Your reason?
True, true, we are four.
liable, congruent and measurable for the afternoon:
Am I the first that have been perjured so?
To tread a measure with her on this grass.
First, from the park let us conduct them thither,
Therefore, brave conquerors,--for so you are,
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
half, hauf, neighbour vocatur nebor, neigh
remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny
proved, wit! By the Lord, this love is as mad as
As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper,
Is of that nature that to your huge store
I am best pleased with that.
Where all those pleasures live that art would
The world was very guilty of such a ballad some
I Pompey am,--
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
What is the figure? what is the figure?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks:
A wife of such wood were felicity.
wench, as touching the hit it.
I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am
O, what a scene of foolery have I seen,
Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor
Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.
Wide o' the bow hand! i' faith, your hand is out.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
This pert Biron was out of countenance quite.
greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of
Sir tell me not of the father, I do fear colourable
Delivers in such apt and gracious words
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony,
Is this your perfectness? be gone, you rogue!
Exit BOYET
hath not drunk ink: his intellect is not
Subtle as Sphinx, as sweet and musical
Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
Which native she doth owe.
hiss, you may cry 'Well done, Hercules! now thou
And often at his very loose decides
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander,--
'The hobby-horse is forgot.'
Her favour turns the fashion of the days,
ignorant, call I the deer the princess killed a pricket.
DON
Judas I am,--
Change not your offer made in heat of blood,
He speaks not like a man of God's making.
Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge, so it shall
hither: I must employ him in a letter to my love.
O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some l'envoy,
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
Say you so? Fair lord,--
This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
And if you prove it, I'll repay it back
The liker you, few taller are so young.
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
This maid will serve my turn, sir.
Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! who understandeth thee
Nine Worthies.
Say to her, we have measured many miles
Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
'Twere good, yours did, for, sir, to tell you plain,
Madame, came nothing else along with that?
A hundred thousand crowns, and not demands,
[Aside]  He speaks the mere contrary, crosses love not him.
And where my liege's? all about the breast:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.
And Jove, for your love, would infringe an oath.
I am betray'd, by keeping company
Advancing
O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living
I do, sans question.
I do say thou art quick in answers: thou heatest my blood.
And out of heart, master: all those three I will prove.
Who are the rest?
me to ridiculous smiling. O, pardon me, my stars!
If study's gain be thus and this be so,
Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
This is not so well as I looked for, but the best
That is not blinded by her majesty?
To lose an oath to win a paradise?
This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye,--
To things of sale a seller's praise belongs,
She must lie here on mere necessity.
[Aside]  Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid:
[Aside to DUMAIN]  Loves her by the foot,--
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
[Reads]
Green indeed is the colour of lovers, but to have a
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
A mean most meanly, and in ushering
Make tender of to thy true worthiness:
If this, or more than this, I would deny,
the writing nor the tune.
DON
On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
HOLOFERNES retires
Thou canst not hit it, my good man.
Fair lady,--
This cannot be Hector.
Come, come, you talk greasily, your lips grow foul.
her shoe, which is baser, guided by her foot, which
Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
esteemed greatness, will you hear the dialogue that
As I have read, sir, and the best of them too.
Enter BIRON, with a paper
When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
Ay, if a' have no man's blood in's belly than will
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid,
Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
Our ears vouchsafe it.
The captive is enriched: on whose side? the
The holy suit which fain it would convince,
Which not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
a dishclout of Jaquenetta's, and that a' wears next
my eyes on thy picture. and my heart on thy every
Alisander the conqueror! You will be scraped out of
Never durst poet touch a pen to write
Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
A leg, a limb?
Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
Unpleasing to a married ear!
I would you heard it groan.
Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
This maid will not serve your turn, sir.
Not unlike, sir, that may be.
The meaning, pretty ingenious?
To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot,
It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is, in
To any lady that subdues a lord.
Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast.
Turning mortal for thy love.
The princess comes to hunt here in the park,
desired employment, BIRON.' Sir Nathaniel, this
was this directed to you?
For every man with his affects is born,
Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song!
DON
Exit
DON ADRIANO DE
Pray you, do my commendations, I would be glad to see it.
Venetia, Venetia,
Our court shall be a little Academe,
DON
were, so fit.
die.
But what of this? are we not all in love?
We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
A twelvemonth! well, befall what will befall,
DON
[To FERDINAND]  Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take my leave.
It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout,
If to come hither you have measured miles,
Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd
gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I am
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms:
I am answered, sir.
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
A world of torments though I should endure,
Then, I am sure, you know how much the gross sum of
Our states are forfeit: seek not to undo us.
Exeunt
Away, away! no time shall be omitted
Marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.
courtesy. I think scorn to sigh: methinks I should
The chain were longer and the letter short?
O short-lived pride! Not fair? alack for woe!
I'll slash, I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you,
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes
to Ajax: he will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror,
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
ambitious, his gait majestical, and his general
Our parson misdoubts it, 'twas treason, he said.
As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
To pray for her! Go to, it is a plague
And Dick the shepherd blows his nail
Please it you,
her belly already: tis yours.
From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
facility, and golden cadence of poesy, caret.
Dead, for my life!
My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon,
'Me, an't shall please you, I am Anthony Dull.
point-devise companions, such rackers of
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit
out heresy. I did converse this quondam day with
Biron, read it over.
Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?
Begin, sir, you are my elder.
DON
And therefore apt, because quick.
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs:
Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.
O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do
do fructify in us more than he.
What time o' day?
Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Or mons, the hill.
mile of my court:' Hath this been proclaimed?
O for your reason! quickly, sir, I long.
he loveth. Assist me, some extemporal god of rhyme,
Not so, sir, under correction, sir, I hope it is not so.
So study evermore is overshot:
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
Remote from all the pleasures of the world,
queen's lords.
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit,
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
I cannot give you less.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
[Advancing]  Come, sir, you blush, as his your case is such,
I am a fool, and full of poverty.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye,
Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! stir them
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
not, loves thee not. Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa.
Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed
l'envoy, no l'envoy, no salve, sir, but a plantain!
But you have out-faced them all.
When I to feast expressly am forbid,
Have no more profit of their shining nights
My lips are no common, though several they be.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell:
How now! what is in you? why dost thou tear it?
It cannot be, it is impossible:
From my lord Biron, a good master of mine,
present the princess, sweet chuck, with some
Well bandied both, a set of wit well play'd.
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow'd!
Else your memory is bad, going o'er it erewhile.
To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man
But pardon me. I am too sudden-bold:
And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been love's whip,
Have at you, then, affection's men at arms.
I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,
Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Biron, one of the strange
Doth this man serve God?
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,--
They do it but in mocking merriment,
[Reads]  'So it is,'--
Some fair excuse.
He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves:
buy for a remuneration?
compliment, I forgive thy duty, adieu.
That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage:
I have promised to study three years with the duke.
Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
But O,--but O,--
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire,
And so adieu, sweet Jude! nay, why dost thou stay?
Might well have made our sport a comedy.
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
Therefore I do it, and I make no doubt
be pardoned.
Only for praise: and praise we may afford
To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
ACT III
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick,
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores
A most singular and choice epithet.
here thou viewest, beholdest, surveyest, or seest,
the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my
Name it.
You are deceived, 'tis not so.
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain,
rude multitude call the afternoon.
We number nothing that we spend for you:
love, with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of
The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be,
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
DON
varied, like a scholar at the least: but, sir, I
may speak of thee as the traveller doth of Venice,
The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
Greater than great, great, great, great Pompey!
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill,
No, a fair lord calf.
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, MOTH, and COSTARD
Even so, my tale is told.
punishment, by thy sweet grace's officer, Anthony
LOVE'S LABOURS LOST
What reason have you for't?
Now, God save thy life!
That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
safe: and you must suffer him to take no delight
And but one meal on every day beside,
Have sworn for three years' term to live with me
fancy, the jerks of invention? Imitari is nothing:
designs, and of great import indeed, too, but let
That the lover, sick to death,
the ear of caelo, the sky, the welkin, the heaven,
Now, for not looking on a woman's face,
love of that colour, methinks Samson had small reason
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive,  They are the ground, the books, the academes From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire
Play'd foul play with our oaths: your beauty, ladies,
Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
Qualm, perhaps.
I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may
Pompey the Huge!
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste:
Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye:
God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
Exit COSTARD, running
How will he triumph, leap and laugh at it!
Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy l'envoy, begin.
Makes heaven drowsy with the harmony.
And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
By my soul, a swain! a most simple clown!
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
BIRON tears the letter
Are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
bear this significant
In conflict that you get the sun of them.
And wrong the reputation of your name,
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
DON
unlettered, or ratherest, unconfirmed fashion, to
Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation,
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair:
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:
DON
Zenelophon, and he it was that might rightly say,
A woman, that is like a German clock,
A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
And the huge army of the world's desires,--
you: you are a good member of the commonwealth.
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
snow-white hand of the most beauteous Lady
So I heard you say.
Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn.
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
And I say, the pollusion holds in the exchange, for
Or yield up Aquitaine.
What mean you, madam? by my life, my troth,
DON
With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
Shall I teach you to know?
you to this?
Write, 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three,
Seemeth their conference, their conceits have wings
How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it
behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is
Sir, the duke's pleasure is, that you keep Costard
[Aside to COSTARD]  They have been at a great feast
For well you know here comes in embassy
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
Fit in his place and time.
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place!
And every jest but a word.
To hear? or forbear laughing?
O' my troth, most sweet jests! most incony
Giving a letter
Good sir, be not offended.
By whom shall I send this?--Company! stay.
DON
be still, drum! for your manager is in love, yea,
I will tell you sensibly.
Finely put off!
Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my
Small have continual plodders ever won
Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say
As the unsullied lily, I protest,
It is not so, for how can this be true,
love her, yes, for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:
No, to the death, we will not move a foot,
Thrice-worthy gentleman!
assure you, sir, I do assure.
Exit
'twill serve.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
'Tis 'long of you that spur me with such questions.
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun
What was a month old at Cain's birth, that's not five
You have put me out of countenance.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
One word in secret.
DON
Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.
To the prince and his bookmates.
I am resolved, 'tis but a three years' fast:
For the latter end of his name.
Apollo. You that way: we this way.
An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
He's a god or a painter, for he makes faces.
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville:
Exit
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
I will visit thee at the lodge.
Yes, madam, and moreover
thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and
Good wits will be jangling, but, gentles, agree:
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
What will Biron say when that he shall hear
I dare not call them fools, but this I think,
O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
I have been closely shrouded in this bush
As we would hear an oracle.
Staying the odds by adding four.
Thou knowest not what it is.
This will I send, and something else more plain,
What humble suit attends thy answer there:
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
What, Longaville! and reading! listen, ear.
and heart-burning heat of duty.
I am bound to serve.
Giving him the paper
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Thou shinest in every tear that I do weep:
[Reads]  'that unlettered small-knowing soul,'--
But, alack, my hand is sworn
Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.
Then cannot we be bought: and so, adieu,
DON
We will read it, I swear.
But that, it seems, he little purposeth,
privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid
tender juvenal?
Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling knight.
Which with pain purchased doth inherit pain:
Immediately they will again be here
and to be melancholy, and here is part of my rhyme,
This article, my liege, yourself must break,
That aged ears play truant at his tales
A time, methinks, too short
bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me!
And coughing drowns the parson's saw
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve,
a votary, I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the
Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
God give you good morrow, master Parson.
And to the strict'st decrees I'll write my name.
Do you hear, my mad wenches?
Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.
Shall I command thy love? I may: shall I enforce
whom came he? to the beggar: what saw he? the
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover,
Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL
Till there be more matter in the shin.
Farewell, mad wenches, you have simple wits.
Exit
That columbine.
to the most wholesome physic of thy health-giving
And raught not to five weeks when he came to
Above the sense of sense, so sensible
DON
Sir, I do invite you too, you shall not
The carved-bone face on a flask.
Judas Maccabaeus clipt is plain Judas.
They do, they do: and are apparell'd thus.
Offered by a child to an old man, which is wit-old.
Go to, thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers'
Armed in arguments, you'll be surprised:
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO and MOTH
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.
osiers bow'd.
Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He
[To SIR NATHANIEL]  O, sir, you have overthrown
No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
A fever in your blood! why, then incision
Of trotting 'paritors:--O my little heart:--
for the time when. Now for the ground which, which,
No point, quoth I, my servant straight was mute.
DON
One rubb'd his elbow thus, and fleer'd and swore
Amen, so I had mine: is not that a good word?
By this white glove,--how white the hand, God knows!--
An I cannot, another can.
orthography, as to speak dout, fine, when he should
LOVE'S LABOURS LOST
LOVE'S LABOURS LOST
By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Enter the PRINCESS, and her train, a Forester, BOYET, ROSALINE, MARIA, and KATHARINE
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion:
Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.
honour is rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.
Sola, sola!
Negligent student! learn her by heart.
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
A wightly wanton with a velvet brow,
Converses apart with FERDINAND, and delivers him a paper
Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
Joshua, yourself, myself and this gallant gentleman,
too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief,
will swear!
Is likewise yours: we to ourselves prove false,
for it. He surely affected her for her wit.
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to
And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy:
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes:
Exeunt
O that I had my wish!
Well, sit you out: go home, Biron: adieu.
Renowned Pompey!
The trumpet sounds: be mask'd, the maskers come.
have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
A right description of our sport, my lord.
Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
I Costard, running out, that was safely within,
O, some authority how to proceed,
DON
Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought,
honorificabilitudinitatibus: thou art easier
it with turning up your eyelids, sigh a note and
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
Then, at the expiration of the year,
We are shame-proof, my lord: and tis some policy
Beauty is bought by judgement of the eye,
What would they, say they?
please you to abrogate scurrility.
Jack hath not Jill: these ladies' courtesy
By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
Therefore change favours, and, when they repair,
No, sir, that were fast and loose: thou shalt to prison.
We need more light to find your meaning out.
Go, sickness as thou art!
a week with bran and water.
A Death's face in a ring.
in the exchange.
five-score.
Did you hear the proclamation?
But that thou interrupt'st our merriment.
And bide the penance of each three years' day.
DON
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
And were you well advised?
In the converse of breath: your gentleness
Hence, sirs, away!
my master.
Which I hope well is not enrolled there,
is a great argument of falsehood, if I love. And
But like of each thing that in season grows.
I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is
mail, sir: O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain! no
Trumpets sound within
I told you, my lord.
thought my spleen, the heaving of my lungs provokes
colours. But to return to the verses: did they
rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
a'leven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon! I
'Ware pencils, ho! let me not die your debtor,
Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
But, with the motion of all elements,
Pretty and apt.
Exit MOTH
Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD
please you, Sir Nathaniel?
O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
O, my good knave Costard! exceedingly well met.
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
Then homeward every man attach the hand
So you, to study now it is too late,
Matchless Navarre, the plea of no less weight
DON
the fifth, if I.
And overheard what you shall overhear,
How hast thou purchased this experience?
But Rosaline, you have a favour too:
Some certain treason.
And trow you what he called me?
To see a king transformed to a gnat!
What then, do you see?
let me borrow my arms again.
What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
Cried, 'Via! we will do't, come what will come,'
on the death of the deer? And, to humour the
beasts most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down
have been sharp and sententious, pleasant without
are but lightly rewarded.
She an attending star, scarce seen a light.
--with your sun-beamed eyes--
One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
DON
With that face?
love, my dear Moth?
What, I! I love! I sue! I seek a wife!
Should be presented at our tent to us.
He is Cupid's grandfather and learns news of him.
DON
We will turn it finely off, sir, we will take
On Navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.
'Fair' I give you back again, and 'welcome' I have
So did our looks.
Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with?
Your absence only.
You nickname virtue, vice you should have spoke,
But do not love thyself, then thou wilt keep
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
You do the king my father too much wrong
Till this madman show'd thee? and what art thou now?
In honourable terms: nay, he can sing
Good master Parson, be so good as read me this
In manner and form following, sir, all those three:
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
Impose some service on me for thy love.
All the fool mine?
DON
The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO
So shall Biron take me for Rosaline.
that obscene and preposterous event, that draweth
one sorel.
I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping:
No enigma, no riddle, no l'envoy, no salve in the
For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have
Or, having sworn too hard a keeping oath,
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep!
seen the day of wrong through the little hole of
the painted cloth for this: your lion, that holds
Almost I had.
Me?
Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.
Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes,
An amber-colour'd raven was well noted.
DON
Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.
Without the which I am not to be won,
I praise God for you, sir: your reasons at dinner
An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst
DON
Let me see, a fat l'envoy, ay, that's a fat goose.
O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
DON
owl and the cuckoo? It should have followed in the
a man when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as
Enter Blackamoors with music, MOTH, FERDINAND,  BIRON, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN, in Russian habits, and masked
word. Well, set thee down, sorrow! for so they say
And yours from long living!
So to the laws at large I write my name:
And in her train there is a gentle lady,
woman. Him I, as my ever-esteemed duty pricks me on,
No, my complete master: but to jig off a tune at
revolutions: these are begot in the ventricle of
Is not nine.
Ay, our way to be gone.
Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud,
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon.
Study his bias leaves and makes his book thine eyes,
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
grace, by the world, sometime to lean upon my poor
Samson, master: he was a man of good carriage, great
My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
'For,' quoth the king, 'an angel shalt thou see,
Let's, mock them still, as well known as disguised:
Vow, alack, for youth unmeet,
This and these pearls to me sent Longaville:
Only to part friends:
Ay, my continent of beauty.
side? the king's: no, on both in one, or one in
I will be welcome, then: conduct me thither.
And he from forage will incline to play:
O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter,
tuft of earth, fire enough for a flint, pearl enough
Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd:
One word in private with you, ere I die.
We will talk no more of this matter.
God comfort thy capacity! I say, the allusion holds
O, me!
Then nightly sings the staring owl, 	Tu-whit,
I'll stay with patience, but the time is long.
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
home! it rejoiceth my intellect: true wit!
The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill.
The street should see as she walk'd overhead.
If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
Your eyes do make no coaches, in your tears
his poll-axe sitting on a close-stool, will be given
For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
O most divine Kate!
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
DON
To make my lady laugh when she's disposed,
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Food for his rage, repasture for his den.
pierced, which is the one?
I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.'
heart cannot come by her, in heart you love her,
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
To make Judas hang himself.
Reads
A calf, fair lady!
O, that's the Latin word for three farthings: three
What says Maria?
DON
Not Iscariot, sir.
DON
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
Here, sweet, put up this: 'twill be thine another day.
Action and accent did they teach him there,
The king he is hunting the deer, I am coursing
With visages displayed, to talk and greet.
DON
No point, with my knife.
Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away!
DON
To my fortunes and me.
A rare talent!
But omne bene, say I, being of an old father's mind,
Exeunt
A Judas!
Was guilty of it. Farewell worthy lord!
Unto his several mistress, which they'll know
That we may do it still without accompt.
He, he, and you, and you, my liege, and I,
And he that breaks them in the least degree
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face,
And maidens bleach their summer smocks
I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
This, fellow: what wouldst?
Of him that makes it: then, if sickly ears,
touch, a quick venue of wit! snip, snap, quick and
You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff,
When you then were here,
God amend us, God amend! we are much out o' the way.
her upon the form, and taken following her into the
Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
Sweet invocation of a child, most pretty and
head: and among other important and most serious
Exit BIRON
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation:
To the PRINCESS
shapes, objects, ideas, apprehensions, motions,
O, would the king, Biron, and Longaville,
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
And he and his competitors in oath
And then grace us in the disgrace of death,
In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
in some form.
Against your peace: Love doth approach disguised,
A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
And one day in a week to touch no food
A most fine figure!
well proved again o' my side! I will not love: if
I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.
A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
Without the beauty of a woman's face?
memory, nourished in the womb of pia mater, and
travel, that hath seen the world, but let that pass.
antique, or firework. Now, understanding that the
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder:
All hid, all hid, an old infant play.
DON
DON
No drop but as a coach doth carry thee,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
for thou art not so long by the head as
Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight?
DON
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On the tabour to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.
That will betime, and may by us be fitted.
Right joyful of your reformation.
Singing
king: it may concern much. Stay not thy
the fool said, and so say I, and I the fool: well
Peace! the peal begins.
Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!--Out--
They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
A cittern-head.
Air, would I might triumph so!
Some entertainment for them in their tents.
O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked under
For fear their colours should be wash'd away.
Rosaline.' I will look again on the intellect of
An thou wert a lion, we would do so.
Reads
Arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they
'Item, If any man be seen to talk with a woman
as Horace says in his--What, my soul, verses?
Which parti-coated presence of loose love
An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
Figures pedantical, these summer-flies
[Reads]  'that shallow vassal,'--
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
attempted? Love is a familiar, Love is a devil:
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Lords o'er their lords?
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
And mock for mock is only my intent.
pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the
My lady, to the manner of the days,
linen: since when, I'll be sworn, he wore none but
A hundred thousand more, in surety of the which,
the moon is never but a month old: and I say beside
Not so, gentle beast:
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy,
To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
DON
will. What shalt thou exchange for rags? robes,
not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean
A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of
DON
glory is to subdue men. Adieu, valour! rust rapier!
Sir, as concerning some entertainment of time, some
wench is cast away: she's quick, the child brags in
Exit LONGAVILLE
Enter BOYET
within the term of three years, he shall endure such
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love,
That mint.
The dogs did yell: put L to sore, then sorel jumps
Ay, in truth, my lord,
[Reads]  'sorted and consorted, contrary to thy
Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
What, what? first praise me and again say no?
Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.
I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights
park, which, put together, is in manner and form
I only swore to study with your grace
his heart for a favour.
See see, my beauty will be saved by merit!
like a porter: and he was in love.
Amazed, my lord? why looks your highness sad?
You found his mote, the king your mote did see,
'On pain of losing her tongue.' Who devised this penalty?
When in the world I lived, I was the world's
The first and second cause will not serve my turn,
A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
farthings--remuneration.--'What's the price of this
This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet,
fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and
Biron, they will shame us: let them not approach.
Not a word of Costard yet.
And though the mourning brow of progeny
say me nay: pauca verba. Away! the gentles are at
By light we lose light: your capacity
Or ever, but in vizards, show their faces?
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
show in the posterior of this day, to be rendered by
To show his teeth as white as whale's bone,
DON
nated, or called, Don Adriano de Armado.
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
And so to study, three years is but short.
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
Soft! whither away so fast?
From which lord to which lady?
Indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the clout.
commiseration on thy heroical vassal! The
Twice to your visor, and half once to you.
If so, our copper buys no better treasure.
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born,
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Giving him a shilling
Biron they call him, but a merrier man,
Of Charles his father.
Told our intents before, which once disclosed,
Mehercle, if their sons be ingenuous, they shall
Is she wedded or no?
ransom him to any French courtier for a new-devised
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
woolward for penance.
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me,
Like a demigod here sit I in the sky.
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
She hears herself.
Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Nay then, two treys, and if you grow so nice,
Exeunt
To tread a measure with you on this grass.
Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
They will not answer to that epithet,
For, ladies, we shall every one be mask'd,
I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see:
Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
A gilt nutmeg.
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, for Hector
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note,
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
And change your favours too, so shall your loves
DON
You will the sooner, that I were away,
wherewith,--
Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
grace's tharborough: but I would see his own person
Who, tendering their own worth from where they were glass'd,
And make a dark night too of half the day--
No, page: it is an epilogue or discourse, to make plain
DON
heart you love her, being out of heart that you
What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter?
Be to me and every man that dares not fight!
Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that is
To break the vow I am engaged in,
O, you have lived in desolation here,
Finely put on!
Where several worthies make one dignity,
She says, you have it, and you may be gone.
I would not have him know so much by me.
We are descried, they'll mock us now downright.
with a wench.
If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
God bless my ladies! are they all in love,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Minime, honest master, or rather, master, no.
Chirrah!
base for a soldier to love, so am I in love with a
these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
letter: it was given me by Costard, and sent me
Above this world, adding thereto moreover
Alack, let it blood.
Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
How many inches doth fill up one mile.
were, I have acquainted you withal, to the end to
If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
I do affect the very ground, which is base, where
We came to visit you, and purpose now
That's too long for a play.
so doth the hound his master, the ape his keeper,
Would that do it good?
Doth noise abroad, Navarre hath made a vow,
There is five in the first show.
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.
The preyful princess pierced and prick'd a pretty
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
As foolery in the wise, when wit doth dote,
the soil, the land, the earth.
For interim to our studies shall relate
vulgar,--O base and obscure vulgar!--videlicet, He
What's her name in the cap?
Of heavenly oaths, vow'd with integrity.
you to gratify the table with a grace, I will, on my
all.
Neither of either, I remit both twain.
Is in one mile: if they have measured many,
and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice, bring
Hector will challenge him.
Not one word more, my maids, break off, break off.
The allusion holds in the exchange.
Now, what admittance, lord?
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.
To let you enter his unpeopled house.
But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then?
Exhalest this vapour-vow, in thee it is:
complete man.
Holla! approach.
And send you many lovers!
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain,
Quis, quis, thou consonant?
Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
some care.
Great reason, for 'past cure is still past care.'
And hold fair friendship with his majesty.
Yes, in good faith.
It is religion to be thus forsworn,
Do not call it sin in me,
Until his ink were temper'd with Love's sighs,
Her shoulder is with child.
easy it is to put 'years' to the word 'three,' and
sore with shooting.
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
I say they shall not come.
A high hope for a low heaven: God grant us patience!
Despise me, when I break this oath of mine.
Prize you yourselves: what buys your company?
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
inclination, after his undressed, unpolished,
If you are arm'd to do as sworn to do,
Visit the speechless sick and still converse
what we know:
because your heart is in love with her, and out of
Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow,
Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'
That more than all the world I did respect her.
I can but say their protestation over,
Hide thy head, Achilles: here comes Hector in arms.
The way is but short: away!
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
The Great.
And mark'd you both and for you both did blush:
DON
Not so, my lord, a twelvemonth and a day
To her decrepit, sick and bedrid father:
Presence majestical would put him out,
I suffer for the truth, sir, for true it is, I was
DON
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
Where hadst thou it?
Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canis,
thou hast thumped him with thy bird-bolt under the
A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
never buy and sell out of this word.
To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
This civil war of wits were much better used
A woman, master.
have it to buy gingerbread: hold, there is the very
Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
When all aloud the wind doth blow
Exeunt FERDINAND, Lords, and Blackamoors
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
grows melancholy?
In private, then.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
And his page o' t' other side, that handful of wit!
O, vile! then, as she goes, what upward lies
A gallant lady. Monsieur, fare you well.
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline,
Still and contemplative in living art.
In love, I hope: sweet fellowship in shame!
I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,--
with my excrement, with my mustachio, but, sweet
Most resolute Pompey!
LOVE'S LABOURS LOST
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
Re-enter FERDINAND, BIRON, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN, in their proper habits
And to her white hand see thou do commend
Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
[Reads]  'with a child of our grandmother Eve, a
It mourns that painting and usurping hair
Muster your wits, stand in your own defence,
I will not be put out of countenance.
Why ask you?
manner of a man to speak to a woman: for the form,--
Is ebony like her? O wood divine!
Give me the paper, let me read the same,
I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his
When she did starve the general world beside
Re-enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO
By favours several which they did bestow.
An excellent device! so, if any of the audience
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
I understand you not: my griefs are double.
No words!
I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big--
Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration!
So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a
and the boy:--
Video, et gaudeo.
Peace!--
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
nominate tender.
To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
In Russian habit: here they stay'd an hour,
It is Biron's writing, and here is his name.
Madam, not so, I do beseech you, stay.
Did he not send you twain?
And, to begin, wench,--so God help me, la!--
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
It should none spare that come within his power.
Yes, yes, he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a,
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
quick by him and hanged for Pompey that is dead by
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
The boy replied, 'An angel is not evil,
Madam, I was.
No, madam, we will bring you on your way.
Have with thee, my girl.
I do protest I never heard of it,
beggar's. The catastrophe is a nuptial: on whose
It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
I cannot stay thanksgiving.
And never going aright, being a watch,
keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away.
marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good
Ha, ha! what sayest thou?
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
Until the goose came out of door,
Costard the swain and he shall be our sport,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground:
Come on, then, I will swear to study so,
Judas I am, ycliped Maccabaeus.
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
And much too little of that good I saw
Nay, then will I be gone.
walk. The time when. About the sixth hour, when
forbear both.
Of his fair mistress: in the afternoon
I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then.
A critic, nay, a night-watch constable,
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
DON
And win them too: therefore let us devise
Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
DON
Disfigure not his slop.
What meanest thou?
Well, then, I am the shooter.
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
vulgar wit!
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder,
Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove:
A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
And gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
We can afford no more at such a price.
Madam, this glove.
A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows.
Were still at odds, being but three.
Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
Exeunt Worthies
Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
DON
will tell you.
I'll make one in a dance, or so, or I will play
None are so surely caught, when they are catch'd,
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Which you on all estates will execute
Were still at odds, being but three.
Is heavy in my tongue. The king your father--
Take away this villain, shut him up.
Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized
With all these living in philosophy.
A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
And birds sit brooding in the snow
Would let her out in saucers: sweet misprision!
I am that flower,--
Of what complexion?
By being once false for ever to be true
You would for paradise break faith, and troth,
the marking of it.
That sport best pleases that doth least know how:
And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
Let us confess and turn it to a jest.
Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
How much is it?
'Fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as I conceive.
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
And younger hearings are quite ravished,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?
God give thee joy of him! the noble lord
You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the
To parley with the sole inheritor
SIR NATHANIEL retires
So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Stands in attainder of eternal shame:
I will, and so will she, I know, my lord.
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight, yea
As honour without breach of honour may
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force:
I know him, madam: at a marriage-feast,
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
Against the steep uprising of the hill?
Exit
Thou now request'st but moonshine in the water.
If my observation, which very seldom lies,
Why, that to know, which else we should not know.
O Lord, sir, they would know
Pompey surnamed the Great,
I'll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say:
That violates the smallest branch herein:
We have received your letters full of love,
I will: and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
What vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?
The sheep: the other two concludes it,--o, u.
assure ye, it was a buck of the first head.
Your nose says, no, you are not for it stands too right.
But is there no quick recreation granted?
Good madam, if by me you'll be advised,
would call abbominable: it insinuateth me of
Toward that shade I might behold addrest
Sirrah, come on.
Too bitter is thy jest.
Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch:
DON
O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
Not by might master'd but by special grace:
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
is basest, doth tread. I shall be forsworn, which
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire:
From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate.
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
Look, here's thy love: my foot and her face see.
She's too hard for you at pricks, sir: challenge her to bowl.
I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.
A true man or a thief that gallops so?
Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
By my penny of observation.
DON
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
Thou fellow, a word:
For the following, sir?
Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.
DON
But will you hear? the king is my love sworn.
weeks old as yet?
Peace, peace! forbear:
For the remembrance of my father's death.
God I have as little patience as another man, and
To make a world-without-end bargain in.
SCENE I. The king of Navarre's park.
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
As wit turn'd fool: folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
With men like men of inconstancy.
That ever turn'd their--backs--to mortal views!
That can never be.
ends, as they say.
Horns.
Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like
Gone to her tent. Please it your majesty
You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir we know
All causes to the purpose of his speed,
What is Dictynna?
Exeunt ROSALINE and KATHARINE
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.
the Worthy, but I am to stand for him.
O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
Veni, vidi, vici, which to annothanize in the
No, cloven.
To dash it like a Christmas comedy:
Exeunt
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosaline.
A man of sovereign parts he is esteem'd,
Come to our pavilion: Boyet is disposed.
Nay, never paint me now:
Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
[Aside to MOTH]  Their eyes, villain, their eyes!
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
Enter COSTARD
More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!
Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in the
Enter the PRINCESS, KATHARINE, ROSALINE, and MARIA
Being but the one half of an entire sum
DON
So were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school:
DON
Belonging to whom?
to that nourishment which is called supper: so much
I do confess much of the hearing it but little of
O, that your face were not so full of O's!
abroad: this letter will tell you more.
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself
pathetical!
The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them, or
Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek,
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults,
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all,
say doubt, det, when he should pronounce debt,--d,
not: his disgrace is to be called boy, but his
A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn,
What's your will, sir? what's your will?
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
To whom shouldst thou give it?
in my shirt.
Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation
Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Prepare, madam, prepare!
O, never will I trust to speeches penn'd,
Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.
more, and, sweet my child, let them be men of good
A light condition in a beauty dark.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace! I have done.
Who sent it? and what is it?
Enter FERDINAND king of Navarre, BIRON, LONGAVILLE and DUMAIN
Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
the instant: by heart you love her, because your
By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough senior.
This is a gift that I have, simple, simple, a
He is wit's pedler, and retails his wares
The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own:
that ever I heard.
bowler: but, for Alisander,--alas, you see how
Art thou one of the Worthies?
Study to break it and not break my troth.
Sole imperator and great general
A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is:
There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
For none offend where all alike do dote.
I know you did.
As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
The king was weeping-ripe for a good word.
Submissive fall his princely feet before,
These be the stops that hinder study quite
I was taken with none, sir: I was taken with a damsel.
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion,
established proclaimed edict and continent canon,
You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.
Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
You lie, you are not he.
accent: let me supervise the canzonet. Here are
the princess, I say none so fit as to present the
not yet: the roof of this court is too high to be
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
There is no certain princess that appears,
Like humble-visaged suitors, his high will.
By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before
Exit
Will you prick't with your eye?
Piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in a
Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
Let's see the penalty.
Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
I do forswear them, and I here protest,
Steps aside
And Tom bears logs into the hall
commander,--
DON
swain,--I keep her as a vessel of the law's fury,
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
As gravity's revolt to wantonness.
In thy condign praise.
DON
A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?
And wonder what they were and to what end
Too much to know is to know nought but fame,
I mean, I walked upon: it is y-cleped thy park. Then
Then nightly sings the staring owl, 	Tu-whit,
No, sir, but it is vara fine,
If it mar nothing neither,
in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. By
Know what they would.
But, I protest, I love to hear him lie
And I will have you and that fault withal,
the word is well culled, chose, sweet and apt, I do
But that it bear this trial and last love,
DON
The extreme parts of time extremely forms
Tell me precisely of what complexion.
'Tis not so much worth, but I hope I was perfect: I
DON
Their purpose is to parle, to court and dance,
Disguised like Muscovites, in shapeless gear,
It doth amount to one more than two.
insinuation, as it were, in via, in way, of
Fair princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.
I never spent an hour's talk withal:
He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.
But to speak that in words which his eye hath
Another of these students at that time
Full merrily
Which we much rather had depart withal
Pardon, sir, error: he is not quantity enough for
Stands aside
Enter SIR NATHANIEL, for Alexander
I thank your worship: God be wi' you!
Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL
Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse,
To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
The blood of youth burns not with such excess
Hark, slave, it is but this:
DON
My favour were as great, be witness this.
You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes
From what it purposed, since, to wail friends lost
Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
Tu-who, a merry note,
And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
left pap. In faith, secrets!
DON
Do paint the meadows with delight,
And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'ereye.
I was seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with
Sans sans, I pray you.
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
A woman I forswore, but I will prove,
Of Costard.
a pin, if the other three were in. Here comes one
SCENE I. The same.
That we must stand and play the murderer in?
If she be made of white and red,
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty
Ergo I come with this apology.
Do not you know my lady's foot by the squier,
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
To know his pleasure, and in that behalf,
I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
Sweet bloods, I both may and will.
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
[Reads]  'Item, That no woman shall come within a
DON
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
Any thing like?
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
pleasing pricket,
Most military sir, salutation.
Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
with a paper: God give him grace to groan!
Enter DUMAIN, with a paper
Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
WINTER.
Wish himself the heaven's breath.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan:
Great, the parish curate, Alexander, Armado's page,
Not so, my lord, it is not so, I swear,
Some men must love my lady and some Joan.
Were not you here but even now disguised?
O most profane coxcomb!
Most rare Pompey!
Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
DON
A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it.
And, certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
example my digression by some mighty precedent.
And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
As, painfully to pore upon a book
the tired horse his rider. But, damosella virgin,
Spied a blossom passing fair
DON
DON
So please your grace, the packet is not come
My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes
impudency, learned without opinion, and strange with-
Judas I am,--
Before I saw you, and the world's large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
Not you to me, but I betray'd by you:
write, pen, for I am for whole volumes in folio.
I am much deceived but I remember the style.
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
words, and therefore I will say nothing: I thank
curate and your sweet self are good at such
Two hot sheeps, marry.
the passado he respects not, the duello he regards
Concolinel.
Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid
Shall I tell you a thing?
I do betray myself with blushing. Maid!
Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man:
Wounds like a leaden sword.
Armado o' th' one side,--O, a most dainty man!
Some salve for perjury.
But are you not ashamed? nay, are you not,
She is an heir of Falconbridge.
Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
enfreedoming thy person, thou wert immured,
In their own shapes, for it can never be
Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this?
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
DON
But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill,
Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
No woman may approach his silent court:
came, saw, and overcame: he came, one, saw two,
Is that one of the four complexions?
Enter DULL, COSTARD, and JAQUENETTA
DON
Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
DON
Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.
Light seeking light doth light of light beguile:
The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
What present hast thou there?
Enter the PRINCESS of France, ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, Lords, and other Attendants
presents Hector of Troy, the swain, Pompey the
implore secrecy,--that the king would have me
Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
for tittles? titles, for thyself? me. Thus,
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
I do adore thy sweet grace's slipper.
'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey.
You put our page out: go, you are allow'd,
Twice-sod simplicity, his coctus!
Their several counsels they unbosom shall
In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
This seal'd-up counsel. There's thy guerdon, go.
Exeunt PRINCESS and train
You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
How I would make him fawn and beg and seek
And go well satisfied to France again.
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard:
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil:
Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
A green goose a goddess: pure, pure idolatry.
On serious business, craving quick dispatch,
to the country maid Jaquenetta:
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
Sir, I confess the wench.
Of many weary miles you have o'ergone,
And deny himself for Jove,
Pay him the due of honey-tongued Boyet.
While it doth study to have what it would
There, then, that vizard, that superfluous case
conquering might:
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
Why, villain, thou must know first.
my foe to sweat:
And fears by pale white shown:
Let's part the word.
full stomach.
And shooting well is then accounted ill.
Callest thou my love 'hobby-horse'?
And where that you have vow'd to study, lords,
Then if she fear, or be to blame,
That war against your own affections
Veal, quoth the Dutchman. Is not 'veal' a calf?
Until the goose came out of door,
And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine
Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits
Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
These lords are visited, you are not free,
Worthies, away! the scene begins to cloud.
LOVE'S LABOURS LOST
And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks,
Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
woman when Queen Guinover of Britain was a little
A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
Thou for whom Jove would swear
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO and MOTH
In leaden contemplation have found out
With that which we lovers entitle affected.
I only have made a mouth of his eye,
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Videsne quis venit?
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shalt
When would you have it done, sir?
Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
Peace!
They converse apart
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
from thicket,
Enter FERDINAND, LONGAVILLE, DUMAIN, BIRON, and Attendants
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
We are again forsworn, in will and error.
DON
Mocks married men, for thus sings he, 	Cuckoo,
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
This letter is mistook, it importeth none here,
Nothing but this! yes, as much love in rhyme
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
Why, universal plodding poisons up
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
As love is full of unbefitting strains,
Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
As motion and long-during action tires
The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal
the two learned men have compiled in praise of the
And every godfather can give a name.
Will you give horns, chaste lady? do not so.
No, I'll not be your half
You'll ne'er be friends with him, a' kill'd your sister.
of mine, where, if, before repast, it shall please
How many is one thrice told?
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour,
To lead you to our court, vouchsafe it then.
Why, that they have, and bid them so be gone.
I will put it to them: but vir sapit qui pauca
Study me how to please the eye indeed
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not:
By virtue, thou enforcest laughter, thy silly
You'll not be perjured, 'tis a hateful thing,
SCENE II. The same.
When icicles hang by the wall
Man?
knotted garden: there did I see that low-spirited
Look you what I have from the loving king.
[Reads]  'which, as I remember, hight Costard,'--
Re-enter the PRINCESS, ushered by BOYET, ROSALINE, MARIA, and KATHARINE
A man, if I live, and this, by, in, and without, upon
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
Finely put on, indeed!
The pommel of Caesar's falchion.
On a day--alack the day!--
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
sup a flea.
O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
Dull, a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and
You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit
Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather,
The ladies did change favours: and then we,
Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
Let me say no, my liege, an if you please:
I do assure ye, very good friend: for what is
sweet, deliver this paper into the royal hand of the
This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice,
She is a most sweet lady.
I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
By the north pole, I do challenge thee.
How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
And who is your deer?
Well, it was proclaimed 'damsel.'
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Nay, my choler is ended.
Exeunt MOTH and COSTARD
Not to behold--
O, I am yours, and all that I possess!
love perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?
To ROSALINE
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes,
Yet, since love's argument was first on foot,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
Not utter'd by base sale of chapmen's tongues:
We attend.
Yes, madam, fair.
Which I hope well is not enrolled there:
That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
For here he doth demand to have repaid
With such a zealous laughter, so profound,
The thickest and the tallest.
Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.
Know you the man?
A mess of Russians left us but of late.
LOVE'S LABOURS LOST
And wherefore not ships?
nor no penance, but a' must fast three days a week.
Love, whose month is ever May,
The treason and you go in peace away together.
Save base authority from others' books
It is, 'Great,' sir:--
tempted, and he had an excellent strength, yet was
A lady wall'd about with diamonds!
Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of
A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good Alexander.
I will tell thee wonders.
DON
LOVE'S LABOURS LOST
Who gave thee this letter?
heaven, I do love: and it hath taught me to rhyme
Biron did swear himself out of all suit.
So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
Re-enter BOYET
Why take we hands, then?
And prodigally gave them all to you.
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
insanie: anne intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.
old time, which we may name tough.
Or vainly comes the admired princess hither.
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light,
Come, you transgressing slave, away!
You have a double tongue within your mask,
The young Dumain, a well-accomplished youth,
A good l'envoy, ending in the goose: would you
She might ha' been a grandam ere she died:
I would not yield to be your house's guest,
A beard, fair health, and honesty,
from my snow-white pen the ebon-coloured ink, which
Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
following. Now, sir, for the manner,--it is the
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
DON
SCENE I. The same.
Ay, marry, there, some flattery for this evil.
Such as the shortness of the time can shape,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain?
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy,
What would these strangers? know their minds, Boyet:
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
And talk'd apace, and in that hour, my lord,
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind,
By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
Then wish me better, I will give you leave.
And so, farewell.
The endeavor of this present breath may buy
carriage, for he carried the town-gates on his back
Ay, as some days, but then no sun must shine.
By my troth, most pleasant: how both did fit it!
Subscribes
And, among three, to love the worst of all,
For revels, dances, masks and merry hours
Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was
Speak you this in my praise, master?
I fear too much rubbing. Good night, my good owl.
Most true, 'tis right, you were so, Alisander.
Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra
DON
The worthy knight of Troy.
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,
Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
him with a talent.
LOVE'S LABOURS LOST
With a refined traveller of Spain,
Look, how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
That which long process could not arbitrate:
The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
And they thy glory through my grief will show:
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
What zeal, what fury hath inspired thee now?
will do it sir, in print. Gardon! Remuneration!
No, he is best endued in the small.
How fares your majesty?
And gives to every power a double power,
As is the razor's edge invisible,
Your oath I will not trust, but go with speed
Proud with his form, in his eye pride express'd:
Your favours, the ambassadors of love,
And three times as much more, and yet nothing at
Necessity will make us all forsworn
Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me, I will not combat
To prove you a cipher.
Allons! we will employ thee.
O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her grace?
I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
Suggestions are to other as to me,
at the brow.
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
Grant us your loves.
God's blessing on your beard!
magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set
public shame as the rest of the court can possibly devise.'
To have his title live in Aquitaine,
Men of peace, well encountered.
To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.
Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye?
And not be seen to wink of all the day--
touching the hit it?
Or women's sake, by whom we men are men,
I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding
Bows not his vassal head and strucken blind
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To have one show worse than the king's and his company.
ACT V
discretion, and I will right myself like a soldier.
To LONGAVILLE
progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go, my
To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately, or to
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities,
Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph
I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil
A dangerous law against gentility!
And thank you too, for society, saith the text, is
will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la guerra.
God bless the king!
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords,
SCENE I. The same.
Here comes Boyet.
that Worthy's thumb: he is not so big as the end of his club.
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away.
But in this changing what is your intent?
You may do it in an hour, sir.
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
They will, they will, God knows,
Call them forth quickly, we will do so.
Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!
See where it comes! Behavior, what wert thou
That sings heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.
Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
When I was wont to think no harm all night
That charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
As our best-moving fair solicitor.
If for my love, as there is no such cause,
But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumain?
limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great, the
And, in our maiden council, rated them
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
As thus,--to study where I well may dine,
How well he's read, to reason against reading!
Which we of taste and feeling are, for those parts that
Live register'd upon our brazen tombs
parishioners, for their sons are well tutored by
Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
So do not you, for you are a light wench.
the one maintained by the owl, the other by the
They converse apart
If over-boldly we have borne ourselves
We must of force dispense with this decree,
Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
If they return in their own shapes to woo?
I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.
DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
What, will you have me, or your pearl again?
And I to be a corporal of his field,
My physic says 'ay.'
Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will,
By east, west, north, and south, I spread my
For every one pursents three.
There, an't shall please you, a foolish mild man, an
Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
the nose, as if you snuffed up love by smelling
[Aside]  If a talent be a claw, look how he claws
You do not love Maria, Longaville
There's half-a-dozen sweets.
Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
THE SONG
DON
But what to me, my love? but what to me? A wife?
DON
As bombast and as lining to the time:
Then, in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
More measure of this measure, be not nice.
And so may you, for a light heart lives long.
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:
All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!--
Steps aside
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
a companion of the king's, who is intituled, nomi-
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
What makes treason here?
I am ill at reckoning, it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
False, we have given thee faces.
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
You swore to that, Biron, and to the rest.
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
In reason nothing.
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
offence gracious, though few have the grace to do it.
Biron is like an envious sneaping frost,
It doth forget to do the thing it should,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
And sin to break it.
Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
with thee.
And shape his service wholly to my hests
a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
And three times thrice is nine.
You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?
It is so varied, too, for it was proclaimed 'virgin.'
heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no
I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton
Master Parson, quasi pers-on. An if one should be
air, and, as I am a gentleman, betook myself to
Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
replenished, he is only an animal, only sensible in
Sick at the heart.
Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
to the person written unto: 'Your ladyship's in all
Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
And then, to sleep but three hours in the night,
Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
You are welcome, sir: adieu.
Or for men's sake, the authors of these women,
give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately
Was not that Hector?
Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
DON
For blushing cheeks by faults are bred
Ajax: it kills sheep, it kills me, I a sheep:
Lord Longaville said, I came o'er his heart,
Nay, I have verses too, I thank Biron:
white and red.
Convert to anger, blunt not the heart, enrage it.
Enter LADY MACBETH
Why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this?
Enter ROSS and an old Man
Who wrought with them, and all things else that might
Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen
The moment on't, for't must be done to-night,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body
SCENE I. A desert place.
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
Than such an one to reign.
Ere human statute purged the gentle weal,
Be call'd our mother, but our grave, where nothing,
What will you do? Let's not consort with them:
Stand aye accursed in the calendar!
And yet are on't? Live you? or are you aught
You greet with present grace and great prediction
Enter a Messenger
Hark! I am call'd, my little spirit, see,
Accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas,
As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
me: but I requited him for his lie, and, I
Have done to this.
Why, see you not?
Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth,
Thou wast born of woman
Mean you his majesty?
But screw your courage to the sticking-place,
Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until
Would I could answer
They have tied me to a stake, I cannot fly,
As, an't please heaven, he shall not--they
Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
I would not be the villain that thou think'st
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
Exeunt all but MACBETH, and an attendant
He wants the natural touch: for the poor wren,
Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make
In every point twice done and then done double
Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up
I think our country sinks beneath the yoke,
Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say 't,
Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites,
Exeunt
And guardian of their bones.
Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!
'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said
Well, march we on,
What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?
Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know
Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons,
Within the volume of which time I have seen
Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, patch?
And more I beg not.
Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more:
All our service
Makes us hear something.
Thunder. Enter the three Witches
Which often, since my here-remain in England,
Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.
They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
So brainsickly of things. Go get some water,
Directly.
With twenty trenched gashes on his head,
Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower,
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
With strange invention: but of that to-morrow,
His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear
I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the
This avarice
To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.
Cannot once start me.
before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred
My wife kill'd too?
The wood began to move.
Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace.
Awake, awake!
May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
Were such things here as we do speak about?
New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
Unless the deed go with it, from this moment
And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.
Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark,
Alarums. Enter MACBETH
Enter LADY MACBETH
Our setting down before 't.
We will proceed no further in this business:
The untimely emptying of the happy throne
Young fry of treachery!
I gin to be aweary of the sun,
Fleance his son, that keeps him company,
Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more!
The cistern of my lust, and my desire
Child of integrity, hath from my soul
There 's nothing serious in mortality:
Enter a Messenger
Which was to my belief witness'd the rather,
Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane,
Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men,
Whence is that knocking?
'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
Make it their walk.
What's to be done?
Exeunt BANQUO and FLEANCE
Anon.
To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth
And I another
Why, well.
Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence,
With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men
Exeunt
The time approaches
In such an honour named. What's more to do,
We are yet but young in deed.
Good morrow, both.
'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend!
Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted
The pitfall nor the gin.
Well too.
And shall continue our graces towards him.
'Tis Banquo's then.
Upon the corner of the moon
Enter LENNOX and another Lord
The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon
Will come to know his destiny:
There's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep
Against my near'st of life: and though I could
Of the most pious Edward with such grace
Hear his speech, but say thou nought.
While night's black agents to their preys do rouse.
Upon their pillows:
ACT IV
What is 't you say? the life?
Exeunt, marching
I keep a servant fee'd. I will to-morrow,
There are two lodged together.
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Exeunt
Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time,
Whatever I shall think.
The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
Drum and colours. Enter MALCOLM, SIWARD and YOUNG  SIWARD, MACDUFF, MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS, LENNOX, ROSS, and Soldiers, marching
What is this
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
Yet here's a spot.
Alas, the day!
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! awake!
Thunder. Enter the three Witches meeting HECATE
And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
All is the fear and nothing is the love,
Why do you show me this? A fourth! Start, eyes!
Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.
Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
Looking on his hands
As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites,
Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves
What I believe I'll wail,
May they not be my oracles as well,
All hail, Macbeth, thou shalt be king hereafter!
Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd
No teeth for the present. Get thee gone: to-morrow
for there are liars and swearers enow to beat
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!
Which shall to all our nights and days to come
Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are:
As calling home our exiled friends abroad
Confound and swallow navigation up,
Do I put up that womanly defence,
And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
Knocking within
Which keeps me pale! Light thickens, and the crow
At one fell swoop?
Enter ROSS and ANGUS
They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
Than any is in hell.
'Tis he.
What beast was't, then,
Some must go off: and yet, by these I see,
Fare you well.
That speak my salutation in their minds,
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
Be't their comfort
The table round.
Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?
He has borne all things well: and I do think
the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
Towards which advance the war.
An older and a better soldier none
Where is Duncan's body?
Double, double toil and trouble,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
We learn no other but the confident tyrant
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people,
To-night we hold a solemn supper sir,
I drink to the general joy o' the whole table,
Go to, go to, you have known what you should not.
Was my father a traitor, mother?
Exeunt
This way, my lord, the castle's gently render'd:
The GHOST OF BANQUO enters, and sits in MACBETH's place
I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be,
We fail!
O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
And hold thee to my heart.
The son of Duncan,
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
God's benison go with you, and with those
Donalbain.
More suffer and more sundry ways than ever,
In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
Win us with honest trifles, to betray's
Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air
Of your mere own: all these are portable,
thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou
From whence himself does fly? He loves us not,
Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now.
I thank you, doctor.
But to be safely thus.--Our fears in Banquo
Exit
Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care,
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
This is the door.
These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself
He was a gentleman on whom I built
that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with
When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head,
That I to your assistance do make love,
To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?
Fillet of a fenny snake,
The least a death to nature.
how say you?
Good night, and better health
Now, if you have a station in the file,
And sundry blessings hang about his throne,
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.
Our duties did his welcome pay.
I doubt some danger does approach you nearly:
To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great,
And little is to do.
And 'tis not done. The attempt and not the deed
My worthy lord,
Is Banquo gone from court?
Hath he ask'd for me?
After life's fitful fever he sleeps well,
[Aside to DONALBAIN]        Nor our strong sorrow
All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:
And now about the cauldron sing,
Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise,
To the last syllable of recorded time,
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks,
Be bloody, bold, and resolute, laugh to scorn
That wouldst thou holily, wouldst not play false,
Though his bark cannot be lost,
Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner,
Show me, show me.
No, my lord.
Only look up clear,
Exit Servant
Those he commands move only in command,
A bell rings
Stuck in my throat.
What is amiss?
All continent impediments would o'erbear
For it is thine.
And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen,
As little is the wisdom, where the flight
Ring the alarum-bell. Murder and treason!
On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap,
Thunder. Enter the three Witches
Hark! I hear horses.
Those in commission yet return'd?
Given to the common enemy of man,
Why, so: being gone,
Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?
O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart
Make the gruel thick and slab:
And so I do commend you to their backs. Farewell.
You look but on a stool.
Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
You must have patience, madam.
Painted on a pole, and underwrit,
Where such as thou mayst find him.
Ay, my good lord, your royal preparation
Exeunt
Do faithful homage and receive free honours:
Then comes my fit again: I had else been perfect,
With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven,
I think not of them:
Enter HECATE to the other three Witches
Your children shall be kings.
Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
Woe, alas!
much further,
Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf,
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
'Tis unnatural,
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied,
Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act,
As one that had been studied in his death
Boundless intemperance
The sleepers of the house? speak, speak!
Exeunt
And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
My worthy Cawdor!
Tell me, thou unknown power,--
Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd
Was once thought honest: you have loved him well.
Than is his father's, must embrace the fate
No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so,
Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides,
When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two
And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'
Which smoked with bloody execution,
He's worth more sorrow,
Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.
And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
Impostors to true fear, would well become
From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony,
Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,
Thou know'st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.
I have no relish of them, but abound
Exeunt
And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man:
For thy undaunted mettle should compose
Who's there?
Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff
Wherefore was that cry?
Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
What is thy name?
Hail!
Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
I will drain him dry as hay:
I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff,
Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
Exeunt
Call 'em, let me see 'em.
We are resolved, my lord.
Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon 's.
That this great king may kindly say,
The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
Ay, my good lord.
As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they
The galloping of horse: who was't came by?
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
The sleepy grooms with blood.
Doubtful it stood,
Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life,
You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom
The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge
Why, by the verities on thee made good,
Macbeth doth come.
The life o' the building!
You shall be king.
With what I get, I mean, and so do they.
In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you,
Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
And all to all.
Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,
Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.
Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth,
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
Knocking within
Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
The worthy thane of Ross.
The labour we delight in physics pain.
And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
Than terms can give thee out!
To prick the sides of my intent, but only
And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn as you
Ring the alarum-bell! Blow, wind! come, wrack!
Could trammel up the consequence, and catch
Alack, I am afraid they have awaked,
The expedition my violent love
Be not found here, hence, with your little ones.
O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!
Here's our chief guest.
Come, go we to the king, our power is ready,
In riddles and affairs of death,
The repetition, in a woman's ear,
We will require her welcome.
Shall be the maws of kites.
But certain issue strokes must arbitrate:
What, quite unmann'd in folly?
And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep--
Hail!
gracious Duncan
Give me my sword.
What, my good lord?
Stands Scotland where it did?
SCENE V. A Heath.
That man may question? You seem to understand me,
In the cauldron boil and bake,
Great happiness!
Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares,
Bring it after me.
Enter a Servant
ACT III
To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself.
I am a man again. Pray you, sit still.
Would murder as it fell.
Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.
Gives way to in repose!
Not unaccompanied invest him only,
Thanks to your majesty.
Against those honours deep and broad wherewith
Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
to have had so much blood in him.
Bell rings
Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill
Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour
But in them nature's copy's not eterne.
The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be,
That should applaud again.--Pull't off, I say.--
Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
Another yet! A seventh! I'll see no more:
I hope, in no place so unsanctified
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
Wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes,
O, relation
He is already named, and gone to Scone
Cousins, a word, I pray you.
Every one.
There would have been a time for such a word.
To what they were before. My pretty cousin,
Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not. Seyton!
Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore, to horse,
'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries.
And at the pit of Acheron
Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
Demand.
Till then, enough. Come, friends.
Strange things I have in head, that will to hand,
Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!
Were they not forced with those that should be ours,
It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus
Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
not stand to, in conclusion, equivocates him
Err in report of us.
Of our great quell?
It is too full o' the milk of human kindness
My royal lord,
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
No, cousin, I'll to Fife.
Shall never tremble: or be alive again,
Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.
Look what I have.
That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
Where hast thou been, sister?
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!
Even so?
My voice is in my sword: thou bloodier villain
This night's great business into my dispatch,
Who was the thane lives yet,
Had I three ears, I'ld hear thee.
Our lack is nothing but our leave, Macbeth
All the particulars of vice so grafted
His absence, sir,
That will with due decision make us know
Enter MACBETH
From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth
What is your gracious pleasure?
Re-enter Attendant, with two Murderers
way to the everlasting bonfire.
Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,
All that impedes thee from the golden round,
this place is too cold for hell. I'll devil-porter
Knock,
Till he faced the slave,
As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out
you'll sweat for't.
Yes,
Why should I play the Roman fool, and die
Hail, King of Scotland!
Had he his hurts before?
Is to receive our duties, and our duties
I bear a charmed life, which must not yield,
What is a traitor?
With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
[Aside]  Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
Is the king stirring, worthy thane?
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
To bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate:
No, nor more fearful.
It shall make honour for you.
As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
We will establish our estate upon
Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,
To the succeeding royalty he leaves
The newest state.
The cloudy messenger turns me his back,
Thyself and office deftly show!
And many unrough youths that even now
The Prince of Cumberland, which honour must
A banquet prepared. Enter MACBETH, LADY MACBETH, ROSS, LENNOX, Lords, and Attendants
I'll catch it ere it come to ground:
Was to be trusted with them.
He hath been in unusual pleasure, and
Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers
Hail, King of Scotland!
Which might appal the devil.
His uncle Siward and the good Macduff:
What is't you do?
Exeunt
And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour
'Give me,' quoth I:
That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?
A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
your pardon,
knock, never at quiet! What are you? But
We will speak further.
The multiplying villanies of nature
I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
Thou canst not say I did it: never shake
Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
fear who knows it, when none can call our power to
Hautboys and torches. Enter a Sewer, and divers  Servants with dishes and service, and pass over the stage. Then enter MACBETH
Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits:
His flight was madness: when our actions do not,
Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee?
Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands
What, can the devil speak true?
that: heaven knows what she has known.
What three things does drink especially provoke?
Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day,
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
For sundry weighty reasons.
I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl,
Ay.
Who I myself struck down, and thence it is,
Run away, I pray you!
He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
And be all traitors that do so?
If he had been forgotten,
This ignorant present, and I feel now
Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
Give me my armour.
And set me up in hope? But hush! no more.
With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.
Opens the gate
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets:
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
I myself have all the other,
My plenteous joys,
Approaching the door
This murderous shaft that's shot
Horrible sight! Now, I see, 'tis true,
This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
Will you to Scone?
He hath honour'd me of late, and I have bought
As I descended?
There is ten thousand--
Sit, worthy friends: my lord is often thus,
By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night,
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood,
That keep the word of promise to our ear,
her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
Whither should I fly?
May soon return to this our suffering country
Whose absence is no less material to me
I put myself to thy direction, and
hand. Oh, oh, oh!
Hark!
SCENE IV. Outside Macbeth's castle.
Consider it not so deeply.
I would, while it was smiling in my face,
Now, good digestion wait on appetite,
Lays blame upon his promise. Please't your highness
Shall come against him.
Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
Only to herald thee into his sight,
That it was he in the times past which held you
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
And points at them for his.
Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is
There's no art
Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
Exit Doctor
Come, put mine armour on, give me my staff.
Being unprepared,
I take't, 'tis later, sir.
The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set for.
Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
To give obedience where 'tis truly owed:
A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once
He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
They stared, and were distracted, no man's life
A deep repentance: nothing in his life
Geese, villain!
watching! In this slumbery agitation, besides her
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
SCENE IV. Country near Birnam wood.
All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
Knock,
provoker of three things.
Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
What's the matter.
And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.
So, prithee, go with me.
When I behold--Seyton, I say!--This push
Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one
As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine--
Double, double toil and trouble,
That look'd upon't. Here comes the good Macduff.
Is thy master stirring?
Thou speak'st with all thy wit: and yet, i' faith,
A light, a light!
But Macbeth is.
Exeunt
Here I have a pilot's thumb,
But with the aid of use.
The curtain'd sleep, witchcraft celebrates
But I am faint, my gashes cry for help.
Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
continually, 'tis her command.
Drum and colours. Enter MALCOLM, SIWARD, MACDUFF, and their Army, with boughs
And, which is worse, all you have done
Why, how now, Hecate! you look angerly.
And chastise with the valour of my tongue
Is added to her wounds: I think withal
LADY MACBETH is carried out
Those that we bury back, our monuments
Or have we eaten on the insane root
With this there grows
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,
Each drop of us.
A drum, a drum!
Exit
Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
Stop up the access and passage to remorse,
The nearer bloody.
And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like
What is your tidings?
Stand not upon the order of your going,
Sirrah, your father's dead,
Shakes so my single state of man that function
When living light should kiss it?
And you whose places are the nearest, know
But I have none: the king-becoming graces,
By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis,
So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune,
Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken,
I would applaud thee to the very echo,
Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
Unsafe the while, that we
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,
Things have been strangely borne. The
What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug,
Throw physic to the dogs, I'll none of it.
[Aside]                Come what come may,
Fly to the court of England and unfold
But who did bid thee join with us?
I would not wish them to a fairer death:
My lord, I will not.
They fight
When I came hither to transport the tidings,
I'll bring you to him.
Your royal father 's murder'd.
Look to the lady:
If I stand here, I saw him.
For brave Macbeth--well he deserves that name--
Your vessels and your spells provide,
Too cruel any where.
Am I to fear, or none.
She should have died hereafter,
With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed:
His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
And sleep in spite of thunder.
Then the charm is firm and good.
Thou liest, abhorred tyrant, with my sword
He only lived but till he was a man,
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
We are your guest to-night.
Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,'
I do forget.
Sleep shall neither night nor day
I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband,
To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night:
Leave all the rest to me.
To-morrow, as he purposes.
Seize upon Fife, give to the edge o' the sword
Beware the thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough.
To doff their dire distresses.
I think, but dare not speak.
'Gainst nature still!
My hands are of your colour, but I shame
Gentlemen, rise: his highness is not well.
That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth
My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.
Which can interpret further: only, I say,
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!
Feed, and regard him not. Are you a man?
SCENE I. Court of Macbeth's castle.
Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
That trusted home
We are coming thither: gracious England hath
No, not to live. O nation miserable,
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood
Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,
Still to return your own.
That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
Whether they live or die.
The water of my land, find her disease,
The greatest is behind.
Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
They fight and YOUNG SIWARD is slain
Thou liest, thou shag-hair'd villain!
I have almost forgot the taste of fears,
Blessing upon you!
Hath so exasperate the king that he
He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure
All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, thane of Cawdor!
Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!
Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd,
To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice
Exeunt
By many of these trains hath sought to win me
Till seven at night: to make society
For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive
How does your patient, doctor?
him on, and it takes him off, it persuades him,
But cruel are the times, when we are traitors
What's the newest grief?
So shall I, love, and so, I pray, be you:
Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,
In measureless content.
Cut short all intermission, front to front
SCENE VIII. Another part of the field.
Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and
Look, how our partner's rapt.
'They met me in the day of success: and I have
The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,
Where is your husband?
Days and nights has thirty-one
swear in both the scales against either scale,
So all.
Enter MACBETH, and a Servant with a torch
And I, the mistress of your charms,
But no more sights!--Where are these gentlemen?
Who dares do more is none.
The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd
Exit Attendant
Not yet.
Suspicion of the deed.
it provokes the desire, but it takes
Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests,
A friend.
Here, my good lord. What is't that moves your highness?
To make their audit at your highness' pleasure,
You see, her eyes are open.
No sooner justice had with valour arm'd
Must be provided for: and you shall put
Fleance is 'scaped.
Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.
The general cause? or is it a fee-grief
With one that saw him die: who did report
That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis a-making,
Come, let's make haste, she'll soon be back again.
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
He has almost supp'd: why have you left the chamber?
Which weighs upon the heart?
And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp:
Take thy face hence.
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.
Shall e'er have power upon thee.' Then fly,
Music and a song within: 'Come away, come away,'  and c
I see thee yet, in form as palpable
Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath
SCENE III. England. Before the King's palace.
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
Nay, how will you do for a husband?
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
Know you not he has?
Very gladly.
Flourish. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX, and Attendants
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
Who cannot want the thought how monstrous
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.
Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless.
Was the hope drunk
Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
And all-thing unbecoming.
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
What, you egg!
Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey
I care not if thou dost for me as much.
Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.
That, sir, which I will not report after her.
What, is this so?
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!
And say it is not so.
The multitudinous seas in incarnadine,
But how wilt thou do for a father?
The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day:
confirm my speech.
perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little
Bring me no more reports, let them fly all:
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss,
When you durst do it, then you were a man,
To be his purveyor: but he rides well,
Took off her life, this, and what needful else
Why, one that swears and lies.
SCENE III. The same.
Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane,
SCENE II. The country near Dunsinane.
We shall not spend a large expense of time
The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath,
Uproar the universal peace, confound
He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald--
Thy crown does sear mine eye-balls. And thy hair,
There's blood on thy face.
That vulture in you, to devour so many
That you do lie so late?
Their hands and faces were an badged with blood,
In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,
And when goes hence?
Enter LENNOX
He has no children. All my pretty ones?
See, see, our honour'd hostess!
The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
Neither to you nor any one, having no witness to
Thanks, sir: the like to you!
And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,
That would make good of bad, and friends of foes!
And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
We have lost
The king comes here to-night.
Like the poor cat i' the adage?
Who did strike out the light?
Exit
Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
Hath been but for a wayward son,
into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in
By him that shall succeed.
I should report that which I say I saw,
As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of
How does my wife?
It should not stand in thy posterity,
New horrors come upon him,
To kill their gracious father? damned fact!
Ride you this afternoon?
I pray you, speak not, he grows worse and worse,
To you they have show'd some truth.
What news more?
He will again be well: if much you note him,
If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,
It is myself I mean: in whom I know
It is a banquet to me. Let's after him,
Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:
It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman,
Do swarm upon him--from the western isles
Or else worth all the rest, I see thee still,
Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return
How goes the world, sir, now?
For strangers to my nature. I am yet
Turn, hell-hound, turn!
The future in the instant.
Killing swine.
Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers,
At our great bidding?
Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined
And push us from our stools: this is more strange
'Tis said they eat each other.
I must not look to have, but, in their stead,
Good night, good doctor.
Whose being I do fear: and, under him,
'Twas a rough night.
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting,
Thou art the nonpareil.
The English force, so please you.
It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
Wreck'd as homeward he did come.
Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
SCENE VII. Another part of the field.
shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver
Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late.
And mingle with the English epicures:
His secret murders sticking on his hands,
They smack of honour both. Go get him surgeons.
I hear a knocking
time, have you heard her say?
His mansion and his titles in a place
Here's a knocking indeed! If a
Your favours nor your hate.
Lamentings heard i' the air, strange screams of death,
First Murderer appears at the door
Re-enter MACDUFF, with MACBETH's head
Who then shall blame
Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
The devil himself could not pronounce a title
old turning the key.
Despair thy charm,
And that well might
Exit LADY MACDUFF, crying 'Murder!' Exeunt Murderers, following her
Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear,
Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't:
I have done no harm. But I remember now
Where the place?
To our own lips. He's here in double trust,
As the weird women promised, and, I fear,
him.
If you would grant the time.
Foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds
Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever
Yet it shall be tempest-tost.
Send out more horses, skirr the country round,
Were poor and single business to contend
Than pity for mischance!
And the rich East to boot.
The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak
By his own interdiction stands accursed,
When first they put the name of king upon me,
Do call it valiant fury: but, for certain,
Hath left you unattended.
Ourself will mingle with society,
To be invested.
To grace us with your royal company.
Exit. Alarums
In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters,
There's not a one of them but in his house
Attend his majesty!
But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in
I will not be afraid of death and bane,
He shall live a man forbid:
Shall he dwindle, peak and pine:
You must leave this.
To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart
Retreat. Flourish. Enter, with drum and colours, MALCOLM, SIWARD, ROSS, the other Thanes, and Soldiers
Both of you
Now near enough: your leafy screens throw down.
If it be mine,
Do we but find the tyrant's power to-night,
Our tears are not yet brew'd.
I dare abide no longer.
His silver skin laced with his golden blood,
O gentle lady,
Some say he's mad, others that lesser hate him
My liege,
His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons
No less to have done so, let me enfold thee
Thus do go about, about:
Knock,
Why,  the honest men.
But go at once.
Exeunt
Gall of goat, and slips of yew
Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
Show his eyes, and grieve his heart,
And question this most bloody piece of work,
Which would be planted newly with the time,
To half a soul and to a notion crazed
How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight
Our pleasure?
I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,
Of noble having and of royal hope,
We will perform in measure, time and place:
To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage,
Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
Enter LADY MACBETH
Is mortals' chiefest enemy.
Itself for being there?
Do come to Dunsinane:'  and now a wood
Ay, madam, but returns again to-night.
Hold, take my sword. There's husbandry in heaven,
Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night
That he seems rapt withal: to me you speak not.
For it hath cow'd my better part of man!
Macduff, this noble passion,
That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold,
Thanks for your pains.
But yet I'll make assurance double sure,
And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.
I'll charm the air to give a sound,
And play the humble host.
What, in our house?
Came post with post, and every one did bear
My father is not dead, for all your saying.
That death and nature do contend about them,
Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths,
A stanchless avarice that, were I king,
He will not be commanded: here's another,
Let's make us medicines of our great revenge,
When shall we three meet again
And you all know, security
That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
[Aside]  The Prince of Cumberland! that is a step
And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
Make all our trumpets speak, give them all breath,
Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,
in, equivocator.
So under fortune, which you thought had been
What hands are here? ha! they pluck out mine eyes.
Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger:
We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
Enter LADY MACBETH, reading a letter
Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
All causes shall give way: I am in blood
And so, his knell is knoll'd.
Shall have more vices than it had before,
Shall take upon 's what else remains to do,
Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave
In evils to top Macbeth.
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
That seems to speak things strange.
Paddock calls.
Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
And I'll request your presence.
In England and in Ireland, not confessing
Ay, that he was.
An absolute trust.
Than would make up his message.
Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
Enter Murderers
Dies
Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time
And falls on the other.
Thy letters have transported me beyond
What are these faces?
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark:
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
Infected be the air whereon they ride,
Stand to't.
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.
Madam, I will.
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
Hum! I guess at it.
Look like the time, bear welcome in your eye,
Let our just censures
Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too,
'Faith sir, we were carousing till the
Dying or ere they sicken.
Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:
He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not,
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.
Be not offended:
Exeunt, marching
their possets,
To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
They presently amend.
Her nine farrow, grease that's sweaten
Live elves and fairies in a ring,
second cock: and drink, sir, is a great
To wear a heart so white.
Come, bring me where they are.
The wood of Birnam.
thy wrongs,
No, indeed, my lord.
Thou mayst revenge. O slave!
Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel,
O well done! I commend your pains,
I shall be counsell'd.
Knock,
Command upon me, to the which my duties
Ay, sir, all this is so: but why
More potent than the first.
Where hearing should not latch them.
In borrow'd robes?
And health on both!
Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
What cannot you and I perform upon
With my confineless harms.
Ay, on the front.
How now, my lord! why do you keep alone,
To those that know me. Come, love and health to all,
Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds
Not in the legions
To cry 'Hold, hold!'
And with his former title greet Macbeth.
When?
What do you mean?
The raven himself is hoarse
To what I ask you.
I grant him bloody,
Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.
False face must hide what the false heart doth know.
Saucy and overbold? How did you dare
It shall be done.
That stay his cure: their malady convinces
The thane of Fife had a wife: where is she now?--
Almost a mile: but he does usually,
No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive
What had he done, to make him fly the land?
Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead
cannot come out on's grave.
Most royal sir,
By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good,
I am for the air, this night I'll spend
Good sir, why do you start, and seem to fear
And beat them backward home.
In nature is a tyranny, it hath been
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
My children too?
Since that the truest issue of thy throne
Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will.
I dare do all that may become a man,
Enter LADY MACBETH and a Servant
Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman
But shift away: there's warrant in that theft
Exeunt
I say, a moving grove.
This diamond he greets your wife withal,
That could be found.
Shall we well meet them, that way are they coming.
Descends
For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind,
So I lose none
Art not without ambition, but without
If you can look into the seeds of time,
Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand--
Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth
Ah, good father,
And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear
That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool,
And hath been from his youth: pray you, keep seat,
Already are i' the court.
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come
To alter favour ever is to fear:
I'll go no more:
Near Birnam wood
How now! what news?
And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live,
And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis,
to question them further, they made themselves air,
done cannot be undone.--To bed, to bed, to bed!
And with thy bloody and invisible hand
This castle hath a pleasant seat, the air
And meet i' the hall together.
With terrible numbers,
Within this three mile may you see it coming,
True, my lord.
I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?
SCENE VI. Forres. The palace.
Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going,
To the direction just.
If he were dead, you'ld weep for
This is a sorry sight.
This disease is beyond my practise: yet I have known
Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
What, sir, not yet at rest? The king's a-bed:
Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed,
I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
Who dares receive it other,
O, never
Of dire combustion and confused events
Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so:
Witches vanish
In the division of each several crime,
And so, God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.
Thunder. First Apparition: an armed Head
How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me:
'Tis safer to be that which we destroy
Cannot conceive nor name thee!
That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
Infirm of purpose!
For 'tis my limited service.
To give thee from our royal master thanks,
Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought
Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
Howe'er you come to know it, answer me:
Our royal master 's murder'd!
Makes wing to the rooky wood:
Therein the patient
When mine is blanched with fear.
The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
Became him like the leaving it, he died
Exit Sergeant, attended
Is he dispatch'd?
That every minute of his being thrusts
How is't with me, when every noise appals me?
And thrice again, to make up nine.
I shall do so,
Making the green one red.
Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.
Have so incensed that I am reckless what
The air is delicate.
Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell
In pious rage the two delinquents tear,
Our point of second meeting. Do you find
But float upon a wild and violent sea
Thou marvell'st at my words: but hold thee still,
The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep,
Enter MACBETH
Enter a Doctor
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,
Knocking within
Let 's away,
Shall not be long but I'll be here again:
Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of
Exit Murderer
For it must seem their guilt.
Hang upon his pent-house lid,
Strange images of death. As thick as hail
Yes, he is dead, how wilt thou do for a father?
Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
a French hose: come in, tailor, here you may
That will never be
Augurs and understood relations have
Ay, my good lord.
He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
Flourish
Your noble friends do lack you.
Now does he feel
What does the tyrant?
The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
[Aside]  Glamis, and thane of Cawdor!
but something
With blood of thine already.
Loves for his own ends, not for you.
Enter MACBETH, SEYTON, and Soldiers, with drum and colours
The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly,
As thou didst leave it.
More needs she the divine than the physician.
When they did say 'God bless us!'
To ROSS and ANGUS
To make me hunger more, that I should forge
What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.
Thunder. Second Apparition: A bloody Child
He knows thy thought:
Ay, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow
I have said.
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none:
As life were in't: I have supp'd full with horrors,
That had a heart to love, and in that heart
I'll send my prayers with him.
That speak him full of grace.
name? Faith, here's an equivocator, that could
And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
Destroying them for wealth.
To cure this deadly grief.
The power of man, for none of woman born
But I must also feel it as a man:
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
This tune goes manly.
'Tis given with welcome: to feed were best at home,
Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time,
The usurper's cursed head: the time is free:
Re-enter SEYTON
Poor bird! thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime,
Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
Duncan comes here to-night.
But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What's he
Hath in him closed, whereby he does receive
Which of you have done this?
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
the instruments,
No mind that's honest
account?--Yet who would have thought the old man
Aside
Gracious my lord,
I'll call upon you straight: abide within.
And all my children?
So all men do, from hence to the palace gate
That very frankly he confess'd his treasons,
Silver'd in the moon's eclipse,
Drum and colours. Enter MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS, LENNOX, and Soldiers
Exeunt
I am as I have spoken.
Knocking within. Enter a Porter
He did command me to call timely on him:
If it find heaven, must find it out to-night.
'Tis better thee without than he within.
Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude,
His pester'd senses to recoil and start,
When therewithal we shall have cause of state
All by the name of dogs: the valued file
Say 'Thus did Banquo.'
I conjure you, by that which you profess,
Our chimneys were blown down, and, as they say,
Perform what you command us.
Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last,
A kind good night to all!
Let every man be master of his time
In the unshrinking station where he fought,
Well, more anon.--Comes the king forth, I pray you?
Here's the smell of the blood still: all the
By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth
Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid
me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that
That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
That will be ere the set of sun.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!
Why hath it given me earnest of success,
Exeunt Murderers
There if I grow,
And fix'd his head upon our battlements.
I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.
SCENE II. A camp near Forres.
My Genius is rebuked, as, it is said,
Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch
We doubt it nothing.
Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
What sights, my lord?
And I will put that business in your bosoms,
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time,
Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,
up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to cast
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
Ay, sir, there are a crew of wretched souls
I know this is a joyful trouble to you,
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
O, by whom?
Enter LADY MACDUFF, her Son, and ROSS
roast your goose.
As this which now I draw.
My lord, his throat is cut, that I did for him.
Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.
Who should against his murderer shut the door,
She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice
That Christendom gives out.
As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
Finding it so inclined.
To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Which in his death were perfect.
Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell,
I am afraid to think what I have done,
A woman's story at a winter's fire,
Well contented.
Pray God it be, sir.
Without leave-taking? I pray you,
Even till destruction sicken, answer me
I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.
What, will these hands ne'er be clean?--No more o'
Merciful heaven!
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
I had most need of blessing, and 'Amen'
Then you'll buy 'em to sell again.
For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp,
Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
Or so much as it needs,
God, God forgive us all! Look after her,
Wherefore did you so?
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
Enter MACBETH
worlds suffer,
Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good
Exeunt
Under a hand accursed!
The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger,
Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood
Thanks for that:
O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
I will not yield,
Speak, if you can: what are you?
Knocking within
Show!
Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal,
Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
I hear it by the way, but I will send:
it makes him, and it mars him, it sets
Enter SEYTON
When the hurlyburly's done,
Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?
As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
A third is like the former. Filthy hags!
Cool it with a baboon's blood,
himself on the expectation of plenty: come in
Give me your hand,
time, have napkins enow about you, here
Promised no less to them?
The tyrant's people on both sides do fight,
Within the belt of rule.
Was never call'd to bear my part,
Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may:
Well, may you see things well done there: adieu!
And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
What know believe, and what I can redress,
He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
Then 'tis he: the rest
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
To pray for this good man and for his issue,
And beggar'd yours for ever?
That rises like the issue of a king,
Thou'rt mad to say it:
We shall, my lord,
Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
I'll put it on.
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds,
And, like a rat without a tail,
Thou comest to use thy tongue, thy story quickly.
Enter MACBETH and BANQUO
Not pay thee.
It is the cry of women, my good lord.
write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
Is there scarce ask'd for who, and good men's lives
Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown
That it did, sir, i' the very throat on
I'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hack'd.
O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
That hast no less deserved, nor must be known
Enter ROSS
And betimes I will, to the weird sisters:
Apparitions vanish
Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
I am one, my liege,
But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile,
The title is affeer'd! Fare thee well, lord:
My husband!
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
What's the business,
What you have spoke, it may be so perchance.
Is the initiate fear that wants hard use:
A deed without a name.
Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,
First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
The fit is momentary, upon a thought
The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me
The news of thy success, and when he reads
The moon is down, I have not heard the clock.
As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,
Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown,
Ditch-deliver'd by a drab,
'Glamis hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor
then, 'tis time to do't.--Hell is murky!--Fie, my
man were porter of hell-gate, he should have
To be the same in thine own act and valour
Be comforted:
Exit
Enter MACDUFF
Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
And she goes down at twelve.
Still it cried 'Sleep no more!' to all the house:
SCENE VI. Dunsinane. Before the castle.
With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd,
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more,
who committed treason enough for God's sake,
As 'twere a careless trifle.
and disheartens him, makes him stand to, and
Knocking within
Exit
To have thee crown'd withal.
The devil to his fellow and delight
On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes
Let not my jealousies be your dishonours,
Well then, now
where our fate,
Nor would we deign him burial of his men
Say to the king the knowledge of the broil
One of my fellows had the speed of him,
That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
him: if you would not, it were a good sign
Hautboys
That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,
Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men
For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me,
But what is not.
Disguising what they are.
[Aside to MALCOLM]  What should be spoken here,
But like a man he died.
That did the like for Fleance: if thou didst it,
In the poison'd entrails throw.
Against the use of nature? Present fears
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
O Banquo, Banquo,
We are sent
That are within the note of expectation
Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak:
Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt,
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Poor prattler, how thou talk'st!
Sister, where thou?
That chambers will be safe.
Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?
My father as he slept, I had done't.
that I should quickly have a new father.
And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
Your servants ever
What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands.
Make we our march towards Birnam.
I'll see it done.
Attend the true event, and put we on
I know him now. Good God, betimes remove
Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep
But as a thing of custom: 'tis no other,
The great doom's image! Malcolm! Banquo!
Let it come down.
Sir, amen.
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
Though palaces and pyramids do slope
And there an end, but now they rise again,
Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
Wife, children, servants, all
I must become a borrower of the night
And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses,
Now spurs the lated traveller apace
The sin of my ingratitude even now
Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself,
The numbers of our host and make discovery
I cannot tell.
A show of Eight Kings, the last with a glass in his hand, GHOST OF BANQUO following
Was feverous and did shake.
What concern they?
Shall draw him on to his confusion:
Then I'll sit down. Give me some wine, fill full.
Like syllable of dolour.
That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it,
Against the churches, though the yesty waves
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
That has a name: but there's no bottom, none,
Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,
Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight.
Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,
Masking the business from the common eye
And Duncan's horses--a thing most strange and certain--
Did you send to him, sir?
And here from gracious England have I offer
That now
Witches' mummy, maw and gulf
What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature,
I am in this earthly world, where to do harm
But wherefore could not I pronounce 'Amen'?
Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
You do not give the cheer: the feast is sold
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Thunder and lightning. Enter three Witches
Fair is foul, and foul is fair:
ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it
And wears upon his baby-brow the round
Are less than horrible imaginings:
Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter.
Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder,
Is thine and my poor country's to command:
Not cast aside so soon.
Are register'd where every day I turn
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
Enter MACBETH, Doctor, and Attendants
Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements! good!
And wash this filthy witness from your hand.
But yet 'tis one.
'Tis hard to reconcile.
To appease an angry god.
We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases
Hark! more knocking.
In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave,
Our duties, and the pledge.
Well, I will thither.
Would have inform'd for preparation.
Prithee, see there! behold! look! lo!
Weary se'nnights nine times nine
Fie, for shame!
That had he Duncan's sons under his key--
Knocking within
Thy gory locks at me.
Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
To ratify the work--we may again
But in it shares some woe, though the main part
Rather than so, come fate into the list.
Flourish. Exeunt
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
They set upon BANQUO
Come on,
They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes
Where he bestows himself?
Show!
The harvest is your own.
For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires,
You know your own degrees, sit down: at first
Is this a dagger which I see before me,
Shall sun that morrow see!
Well, say, sir.
Descends
her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon
Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed
At what it did so freely? From this time
The queen, my lord, is dead.
That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood
When the battle's lost and won.
should find
'Murder!'
Re-enter MACBETH and LENNOX, with ROSS
Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
Enter BANQUO, and FLEANCE with a torch
Bleed, bleed, poor country!
Threescore and ten I can remember well:
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort:
For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
For ever knit.
And dare me to the desert with thy sword,
They say he parted well, and paid his score:
Where our desire is got without content:
Already at a point, was setting forth.
He does: he did appoint so.
Which still hath been both grave and prosperous,
Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast,
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence
Speak.
The hearing of my wife with your approach,
From Fife, great king,
Even to the disposition that I owe,
For my heart speaks they are welcome.
And what will you do now? How will you live?
SCENE VI. Before Macbeth's castle.
Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor!
True, worthy Banquo, he is full so valiant,
Thou losest labour:
Will I with wine and wassail so convince
mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being
and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her, stand close.
Soundly invite him--his two chamberlains
Stabbing him
And none serve with him but constrained things
Something wicked this way comes.
What should he be?
Help me hence, ho!
So humbly take my leave.
Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
All's well.
And be these juggling fiends no more believed,
But, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd
For where there is advantage to be given,
His horses go about.
Weep our sad bosoms empty.
Say to the king, I would attend his leisure
Who like a good and hardy soldier fought
For a charm of powerful trouble,
But that myself should be the root and father
All unity on earth.
What good could they pretend?
Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
ACT I
Seek to know no more.
Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten
The victory fell on us.
A little water clears us of this deed:
To say I have done no harm?
I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.
Sennet sounded. Enter MACBETH, as king, LADY  MACBETH, as queen, LENNOX, ROSS, Lords, Ladies, and Attendants
think, being too strong for him, though he took
As two spent swimmers, that do cling together
It had been as a gap in our great feast,
Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul's flight,
A good and virtuous nature may recoil
He had none:
Of the imperial theme.--I thank you, gentlemen.
At the south entry: retire we to our chamber,
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
And the very ports they blow,
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
That no compunctious visitings of nature
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
Where's the thane of Cawdor?
How easy is it, then! Your constancy
Though in your state of honour I am perfect.
Listen, but speak not to't.
And with him pour we in our country's purge
I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
Your patience so predominant in your nature
The castle of Macduff I will surprise,
May't please your highness sit.
Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,
Heaven forgive him too!
Pertains to you alone.
Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like
Thou'rt kind.
Swelter'd venom sleeping got,
The flighty purpose never is o'ertook
Meeting were bare without it.
Whose hearts are absent too.
This guest of summer,
With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak,
come, come, come, come, give me your hand. What's
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
I have no words:
Wherein you dress'd yourself? hath it slept since?
No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.
Yet grace must still look so.
The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
[Within]  Who's there? what, ho!
To offer up a weak poor innocent lamb
Nothing in love: now does he feel his title
Are to your throne and state children and servants,
With most admired disorder.
As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!
For a few words.
There's but one down, the son is fled.
With them they think on? Things without all remedy
Exeunt
Exeunt
Question enrages him. At once, good night:
To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Though you untie the winds and let them fight
Those that Macbeth hath slain.
There the grown serpent lies, the worm that's fled
Exit BANQUO
If charnel-houses and our graves must send
Round about the cauldron go,
That was not born of woman? Such a one
I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
Here is a place reserved, sir.
He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young,
Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art
So please you, it is true: our thane is coming:
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
There's comfort yet, they are assailable,
Though our lives--
Let not light see my black and deep desires:
The night has been unruly: where we lay,
Exit Attendant
Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain.
But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
Enter MALCOLM and MACDUFF
Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,
See, and then speak yourselves.
It were done quickly: if the assassination
O worthiest cousin!
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
Best half of our affair.
A fellow to it.
Returning were as tedious as go o'er:
In my most ill-composed affection such
That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them:
SCENE I. Dunsinane. Ante-room in the castle.
My countryman, but yet I know him not.
Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast
Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo: down!
Sent he to Macduff?
Finger of birth-strangled babe
Should be without regard: what's done is done.
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?
To mend it, or be rid on't.
To be thus is nothing,
Then the liars and swearers are fools,
Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks,
no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
knock, knock! Who's there? Faith, here's an
You know not
And the late dignities heap'd up to them,
New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird
For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot:
And bind us further to you.
SCENE V. Dunsinane. Within the castle.
Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,
Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu,
One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other,
Thrice to thine and thrice to mine
Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
Our innocent self: this I made good to you
At no time broke my faith, would not betray
[Aside to DONALBAIN]  Why do we hold our tongues,
Of many kings. If there come truth from them--
Nought's had, all's spent,
Be large in mirth, anon we'll drink a measure
The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
SCENE III. A heath near Forres.
Only for them, and mine eternal jewel
Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down,
So poorly in your thoughts.
To Ireland, I, our separated fortune
Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm.
Why then, God's soldier be he!
Prithee, peace:
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
What bloody man is that? He can report,
Thy hope ends here!
Is left this vault to brag of.
What's the disease he means?
But know not how to do it.
A prosperous gentleman, and to be king
Who lies i' the second chamber?
What man dare, I dare:
Look on't again I dare not.
Come like shadows, so depart!
Was heavy on me: thou art so far before
Whoever knocks!
them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire
Open, locks,
There to meet with Macbeth.
He has kill'd me, mother:
Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them?
Though castles topple on their warders' heads,
Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.
That, by the help of these--with Him above
Hang out our banners on the outward walls,
Particular addition. from the bill
Exit
There hangs a vaporous drop profound,
Come in, without there!
Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums,
As broad and general as the casing air:
Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
Protest their first of manhood.
After these ways, so, it will make us mad.
To doubt the equivocation of the fiend
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.
Wash your hands, put on your nightgown, look not so
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
Is stopp'd, the very source of it is stopp'd.
Be this the whetstone of your sword: let grief
Let every soldier hew him down a bough
And say which grain will grow and which will not,
And hums, as who should say 'You'll rue the time
Due to some single breast?
That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on,
Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
Drum within
lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we
Or show the glory of our art?
Upon her skinny lips: you should be women,
Then stand with us.
Is't far you ride?
God save the king!
Re-enter MACDUFF
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,
To act in safety. There is none but he
Too terrible for the ear: the times have been,
My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
And I must be from thence!
That I did kill them.
The subject of our watch.
You made it known to us.
That you can let this go? Are you so gospell'd
According to our order.
'Tis call'd the evil:
Fit to govern!
'Here may you see the tyrant.'
But be the serpent under't. He that's coming
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,
The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
Knocking within
Both more and less have given him the revolt,
Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward
Enter MALCOLM and DONALBAIN
Are made, not mark'd, where violent sorrow seems
To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,
And fan our people cold. Norway himself,
And my more-having would be as a sauce
Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
Enter BANQUO, and FLEANCE bearing a torch before him
The leaf to read them. Let us toward the king.
Fail not our feast.
And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass
SCENE I. Forres. The palace.
The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength
By the pricking of my thumbs,
And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward:
And live a coward in thine own esteem,
I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive
I pull in resolution, and begin
Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure
Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill,
Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?
As birds do, mother.
These deeds must not be thought
Give him tending,
Into the flame.
He brings great news.
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
That writes them all alike: and so of men.
Exeunt, fighting. Alarums
Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn
Exit Messenger
It is a peerless kinsman.
return to bed, yet all this while in a most fast sleep.
Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and
no greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
For which I must not plead, but that I am
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
There's more behind that is more gratulate.
Make thee the father of their idle dreams
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
If not already.
You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe
See that Claudio
with divines, and have all charitable preparation.
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
[Within]  Ho! Peace be in this place!
I pray you home to dinner with me.
continency, sparrows must not build in his
There to give up their power. If you can, pace your wisdom
To find this practise out.
In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions
Most ignorant of what he's most assured,
Enter ELBOW, and Officers with FROTH and POMPEY
And, on my trust, a man that never yet
My husband bids me, now I will unmask.
A power I have, but of what strength and nature
Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here!
And that, by great injunctions, I am bound
No longer session hold upon my shame,
I'll gladly learn.
Enter JULIET
To the under generation, you shall find
I will bethink me: come again tomorrow.
You must walk by us on our other hand,
On him so near us? This needs must be a practise.
O, pardon me, my lord, it oft falls out,
five marks, ready money: marry, then ginger was not
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have
grace was said.
anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
To soften Angelo: and that's my pith of business
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not,
The miserable have no other medicine
No, but there's a woman with maid by him. You have
Death is a fearful thing.
I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house
I talk not of your soul: our compell'd sins
That sets them on: let me have way, my lord,
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Re-enter LUCIO and two Gentlemen
let me have Claudio's head sent me by five. Let
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
I have so, because it is an open room and good for winter.
I thought your marriage fit, else imputation,
After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor,
Enter DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as before, CLAUDIO, and Provost
Pray, sir, by your good favour,--for surely, sir, a
To save me from the danger that might come
an unshunned consequence, it must be so. Art going
Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.
For my authority bears of a credent bulk,
Ay, just, perpetual durance, a restraint,
What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.
The provost, he shall bear them, whose contents
Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
Bliss and goodness on you!
O, what may man within him hide,
Think you I can a resolution fetch
Here, if it like your honour.
Re-enter Servant
Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death:
If it? please your honour, I know not well what they
Where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.
That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,
That shall be up at heaven and enter there
notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet
He's in the right. Constable, what say you to it?
now stands, he will avoid your accusation, he made
'Tis good, though music oft hath such a charm
Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that
Than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort,
O, peace! the friar is come.
Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once,
but in his clothes, and one that hath spoke most
I humbly thank you.
duke's officer. Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or
Unhappy Claudio! wretched Isabel!
Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's
Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell: go, say I
A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
Judge.
enforce them against him: we shall find this friar a
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd
Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither,
Go do it instantly.
Let this be done.
May call it back again. Well, believe this,
A natural guiltiness such as is his,
the provost.
But speedily.
In good time.
Re-enter ANGELO, MARIANA, FRIAR PETER, and Provost
Here in Vienna, sir.
My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.
I am the provost. What's your will, good friar?
Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor
An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,
requiring with a plausible obedience, agree with
'Save your honour!
Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,
In special business from his holiness.
I stagger in:--but this new governor
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
do it for some piece of money, and go through with
Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.
Nine, sir, Overdone by the last.
'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
Wise! why, no question but he was.
youth of the city?
That brain'd my purpose. But, peace be with him!
Wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls
From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
The vaporous night approaches.
And you shall be conducted.
But yet,--poor Claudio! There is no remedy.
Elected him our absence to supply,
Subdues me quite. Even till now,
[Aside to ISABELLA]  You had marr'd all else.
his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case
That, in the working of your own affections,
Say you so? then I shall pose you quickly.
Your brother is to die.
afternoon?
Betwixt myself and her, which was broke off,
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die:
I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
It was the swift celerity of his death,
O, I do fear thee, Claudio, and I quake,
One all of luxury, an ass, a madman,
To bring you thus together, 'tis no sin,
Now will I write letters to Angelo,--
bread and garlic: say that I said so. Farewell.
I had rather give my body than my soul.
Exit
Exit
To him, and to his substitutes.
this advantage, first, that your stay with him may
Master Three-pile the mercer, for some four suits of
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
Enter ISABELLA
Well, let her be admitted.
I wish you now, then,
As he's reported by this gentleman,
I know him for a man divine and holy,
Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
In any proportion or in any language.
If the duke with the other dukes come not to
I should not think it strange, for 'tis a physic
Goes all decorum.
Now, sister, what's the comfort?
Ere this rude beast will profit.
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir, but yet,
Pay with falsehood false exacting,
Seven year and a half, sir.
When I perceive your grace, like power divine,
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
Give me your hand and say you will be mine.
He was drunk then, my lord: it can be no better.
Most ponderous and substantial things!
Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse,
O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell,
Exit
stolen out of other affairs, but I will attend you awhile.
Yonder man is carried to prison.
and I will have more time to prepare me, or they
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood.
wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this
And not my brother.
I find an apt remission in myself,
duke had crotchets in him. He would be drunk too,
to-morrow four o'clock.
But, ere they live, to end.
You know the lady, she is fast my wife,
Yes, faith, sir.
this true?
I am that Isabella and his sister.
That his blood flows, or that his appetite
What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
persuasion can with ease attempt you, I will go
he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown
Of gracious order, late come from the See
And He that might the vantage best have took
I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
Could great men thunder
Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shooty the
To do in slander. And to behold his sway,
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not,
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
Therefore you speak unskilfully: or if your
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe:
commission for more heads: if this law hold in
Enter DUKE VINCENTIO in his own habit, and FRIAR PETER
And well she can persuade.
So to enforce or qualify the laws
name? why dost thou not speak, Elbow?
I am directed by you.
What, ho! Abhorson! Where's Abhorson, there?
awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my
Then, if you speak, you must not show your face,
went to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scraped
the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight
How would you live, Pompey? by being a bawd? What
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Pleased you to do't at peril of your soul,
To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared,
Enter DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as before
Why, very well, then, I hope here be truths.
To lose his head, condemn'd by Angelo:
justice, sir, and do bring in here before your good
cannot plead his estimation with you, he hath been a bawd.
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
That fellow is a fellow of much licence: let him be
he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were
But let my trial be mine own confession:
Why dost thou ask again?
Upon these slanderers.
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
Good Master Froth, look upon his honour, 'tis for a
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
Ay, that he razed.
Marry, this Claudio is condemned for untrussing.
rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a
This reprobate till he were well inclined,
And blown with restless violence round about
Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
The pendent world, or to be worse than worst
To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
Which once thou sworest was worth the looking on,
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image
Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is't
Shall witness to him I am near at home,
He wants advice.
I shall attend your leisure: but make haste,
merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by
You may not so extenuate his offence
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven,
can do you little harm, you'll forswear this again.
In the delaying death.
This letter, then, to Friar Peter give,
For which I do discharge you of your office:
To make bad good, and good provoke to harm.
Owe and succeed thy weakness.
Your safety manifested.
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself,
Be absolute for death, either death or life
And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand,
Enter Provost and a Servant
Whom I would save, had a most noble father!
Condemn the fault and not the actor of it?
But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.
A very scurvy fellow.
house, next, this is a respected fellow, and his
Desires access to you.
offence, Claudio?
Till he did look on me: since it is so,
Where you may have such vantage on the duke,
I come to know your pleasure.
That I crave death more willingly than mercy,
For every pelting, petty officer
it is but heading and hanging.
What proclamation, man?
to Angelo: if for this night he entreat you to his
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
it may be quickly.
They shall stand for seed: they had gone down too,
pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke?
pulled down?
redeliver our authorities there
Exit CLAUDIO
found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him
Now is your time: speak loud and kneel before him.
Alas! what poor ability's in me
Your unknown sovereignty!
Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
If could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would
Which is the least?
I protest I love the duke as I love myself.
Hannibal! I respected with her before I was married
Do you your office, or give up your place,
no more words.
For which I would not plead, but that I must,
What says my brother?
My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with
Exit
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate,
O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part,
Against my brother's life.
Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
friend of mine.
sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir, 'twas in
He does well in 't.
Exeunt
But, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.
If you be one, as you are well express'd
SCENE I. A hall In ANGELO's house.
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
And satisfy the deputy with the visage
common houses, I know no law: bring them away.
This will last out a night in Russia,
of the prison, give him leave to escape hence, he
but what mystery there should be in hanging, if I
smallest article of it, neither in time, matter, or
For what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour.
We do condemn thee to the very block
Nay, women are frail too.
And, for the most, become much more the better
That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
Be ruled by him.
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius' house,
your full time of imprisonment and your deliverance
they should exhibit their petitions in the street?
And given his deputation all the organs
Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?
of what's past, present, or to come, insensible of
I cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish
I pray you, be acquainted with this maid,
As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil
O hear me, Isabella!
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
glad to receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I
As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.
For certain words he spake against your grace
I will about it straight,
Stands without blemish. Next, it imports no reason
What's mine is yours and what is yours is mine.
Exeunt
Upon a wrong'd, I would fain have said, a maid!
And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon.
violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo, answer his
Welcome father.
But stir not you till you have well determined
Why, no.
The generous and gravest citizens
wicked villain, despite of all grace.
O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see
Benefactors? Well, what benefactors are they? are
Master Barnardine! you must rise and be hanged.
I guess not.
as Claudio's, to cross this in the smallest.
Nor here provincial. My business in this state
Enter ABHORSON
death: you know the course is common. If any thing
And 'twere the cheaper way:
As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
The words of heaven, on whom it will, it will,
gentleman of all temperance. But leave we him to
No, indeed, sir, not of a pin, you are therein in
I'ld throw it down for your deliverance
Caesar? art thou led in triumph? What, is there
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?
All their petitions are as freely theirs
That his soul sicken not.
with man, woman, or child.
Thieves for their robbery have authority
Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
And rack thee in their fancies.
to dine and sup with water and bran, I dare not for
The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know
We did believe no less.
Marry, sir, by my wife, who, if she had been a woman
Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not
Exit
Ignomy in ransom and free pardon
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Not of this country, though my chance is now
like, which else would stand under grievous
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
My lord, we'll do it throughly.
bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must
And by an eminent body that enforced
Save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
And the poor beetle, that we tread upon,
the scale.
you have courage to maintain it: I am bound to call
Exit Servant
feeling of thy speech: I will, out of thine own
very day receives letters of strange tenor,
Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.
Pattern in himself to know,
Which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall
Acquaint her with the danger of my state:
neither maid, widow, nor wife.
Such goodness of your justice, that our soul
Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
And have you nuns no farther privileges?
to continue now, thou varlet, thou art to continue.
Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
But my entreaty too.
I thank you, good friend Lucio.
Must die to-morrow! O injurious love,
[Aside]  Heaven give thee moving graces!
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.
the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born
I do desire to learn, sir: and I hope, if you have
How he refell'd me, and how I replied,--
Dare rack his own: his subject am I not,
Thou art always figuring diseases in me, but thou
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
Go fetch him hither, let me look upon him.
Plainly conceive, I love you.
Alas, alas!
truth enough alive to make societies secure, but
Look, here comes one: a gentlewoman of mine,
How I persuaded, how I pray'd, and kneel'd,
Exeunt
For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun
And you tell me that he shall die for it.
I spy comfort, I cry bail. Here's a gentleman and a
At war 'twixt will and will not.
[Giving a paper]
Exeunt LUCIO and Gentlemen
Hark, how the villain would close now, after his
From such a filthy vice: say to thyself,
Re-enter DUKE VINCENTIO
and an express command, under penalty, to deliver
Exit Boy
Enter a Messenger
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue,
[Within]  A pox o' your throats! Who makes that
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.
It is no other: show your wisdom, daughter,
Pots, and, I think, forty more, all great doers in
customers. First, here's young Master Rash, he's in
By yielding up thy body to my will,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
What, are you married?
As mice by lions--hath pick'd out an act,
What comfort is for Claudio?
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
And good supporters are you.
In this I'll be impartial, be you judge
Marry, sir, he hath offended the law: and, sir, we
I have no superfluous leisure, my stay must be
Exeunt
me to 't. But they say the duke will be here
First, an it like you, the house is a respected
I can hardly believe that, since you know not what
The duke is entering: therefore, hence, away!
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
As then the messenger,--
Than die for this.
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
Whom he begot with child, let her appear,
When it is least expected.
should be hanged, I cannot imagine.
other circumstance. Good morrow, for, as I take it,
In that good path that I would wish it go,
Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,
It is true.
No, indeed.
When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men
Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!
I would Friar Peter--
Kills for faults of his own liking!
the duke we talk of were returned again: the
the goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty
It rested in your grace
No countermand, no such example have we:
Lie hid moe thousand deaths: yet death we fear,
'Tis well borne up.
person than any of us all.
To speak so indirectly I am loath:
whipping, and hanging.
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,
I am your free dependant.
goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it:
Be you content, fair maid,
as a drunken sleep, careless, reckless, and fearless
much more, much worse.
I would do more than that, if more were needful.
you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever,
None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they
is washed with them, but relents not.
For that which, if myself might be his judge,
If any in Vienna be of worth
with me, let not your worship think me the poor
saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana
To use it for my time: I am a brother
they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.
persuasion.
As words could make up vows: and, my good lord,
shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have I
Or else for ever be confixed here,
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what
That thus can make him bite the law by the nose,
complaints, and to deliver us from devices
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
You do but lose your labour.
If yet her brother's pardon be come hither:
duke to be wise.
What's to do here, Thomas tapster? let's withdraw.
Why do you put these sayings upon me?
How now! what's the news with you?
Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd,
answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke,
chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.
beggar. Then have we here young Dizy, and young
To LUCIO
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
the right: but to the point. As I say, this
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing
She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
When must he die?
And what a prisoner.
You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant,
O just but severe law!
His head is off and sent to Angelo.
Yes, truly, I speak not as desiring more,
For then I pity those I do not know,
Enter MARIANA and a Boy
That with such vehemency he should pursue
He says, to veil full purpose.
Dispatch it presently, the hour draws on
Though all the world's vastidity you had,
Shame to him whose cruel striking
But from Lord Angelo by special charge.
married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never
so that in the beastliest sense you are Pompey the
We shill employ thee in a worthier place.
To nothing temporal.
For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
A word of this. What, ho! within! come forth!
He dies for Claudio's death.
More fit to do another such offence
SCENE II. Another room in the same.
with Barnardine's head: I will give him a present
To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased:
Unfit to live or die: O gravel heart!
That's somewhat madly spoken.
virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition
Servile to all the skyey influences,
Is more to bread than stone: hence shall we see,
Not that I know.
Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.
peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of
And yet my nature never in the fight
thine eyes so red: thou must be patient. I am fain
Come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose. What
Else let my brother die,
Stay a little while.
Most bounteous sir,
Was sent to by my brother, one Lucio
Charges she more than me?
May your grace speak of it?
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour
As art and practise hath enriched any
He is your husband on a pre-contract:
And is this all?
Sir, I will serve him, for I do find your hangman is
take him to be a thief too, sir, for we have found
As like almost to Claudio as himself.
Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.
Be stamp'd upon it.
Not Isabel?
fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?
Art thou sure of this?
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
resolved to die.
Once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.
better determine.
[Aside]  Well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
Exit ISABELLA
Very well: you being then, if you be remembered,
For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.
corrupt her, only he hath made an essay of her
you? Show your knave's visage, with a pox to you!
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where,
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied,
direct answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio
No more evasion:
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
Enter BARNARDINE
Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
In hateful practise. First, his integrity
Was fast belock'd in thine, this is the body
good favour you have, but that you have a hanging
Away with him!
Enter POMPEY
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
A thirsty evil, and when we drink we die.
Return him here again. Go with him, provost.
Guiltier than him they try. What's open made to justice,
live, forget to drink after thee.
If power change purpose, what our seemers be.
Welcome, how agreed?
Cut off by course of justice,--
still, ha?
There is another friar that set them on,
Let me entreat you speak the former language.
For I would commune with you of such things
would require is likewise your own benefit.
I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
My haste may not admit it,
Yet did repent me, after more advice,
cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,--
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
Yet show some pity.
You have paid the heavens your function, and the
in all reason should have quenched her love, hath,
Or of the deadly seven, it is the least.
That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.
Sit with my cousin, lend him your kind pains
And with full line of his authority,
Exeunt ISABELLA, LUCIO, and Provost
To-morrow you set on.
If his own life answer the straitness of his
shrift and advise him for a better place. Yet you
if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
Of government the properties to unfold,
But faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes
trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
Now, sir, come on: what was done to Elbow's wife, once more?
I shall, sir. Fare you well.
Believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me two
So every scope by the immoderate use
By those that know the very nerves of state,
Shall I attend your lordship?
I know none. Can you tell me of any?
I will go darkly to work with her.
have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to--
Enter VARRIUS
Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means: but as she
And what shall become of those in the city?
your execution. If you think it meet, compound with
Marry, sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.
My business is a word or two with Claudio.
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
You something know, yet I believe there comes
come to my ward, for thence will not I to-day.
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you,
Exit CLAUDIO
thing about him. Good, then, if his face be the
If your worship will take order for the drabs and
Had you a special warrant for the deed?
and Barnardine. Here is in our prison a common
From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty:
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
you will take it on you to assist him, it shall
That we remember. There is our commission,
To what we fear of death.
I'll tell him of you.
Why would he for the momentary trick
There was a friar told me of this man.
tapsters: they will draw you, Master Froth, and you
duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on
Is he pardon'd, and, for your lovely sake,
As many as you please.
feelingly now?
due of a bawd, why, 'tis his right: bawd is he
In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice,
prunes, and having but two in the dish, as I said,
I know them both.
If he took you a box o' the ear, you might have your
Proclaim you are no less! Can you so stead me
And make us lose the good we oft might win
Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love
Mended again. The matter, proceed.
Well, the matter?
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio:
Mortality and mercy in Vienna
Good even, good father.
As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery, and
Escalus.
Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.
That we may bring you something on the way.
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
come into any room in a tap-house, but I am drawn
A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?
She's very near her hour.
saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes,
ACT III
ACT II
To speak before your time. Proceed.
'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella,
sentenced him. To make you understand this in a
ACT I
But what's his offence?
A French crown more.
Your highness said even now, I made you a duke:
And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!
Come your ways, sir, come.
Should die for ever.
Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
Were testimonies against his worth and credit
Till you have heard me in my true complaint
His filth within being cast, he would appear
As Jove himself does, Jove would ne'er be quiet,
deceiving promises of life, which I by my good
Would he were here, my lord! for he indeed
Eleven, sir.
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
Exit an Attendant
for a commodity of brown paper and old ginger,
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and in the
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
That stays upon me, whose persuasion is
Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well:
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd:
Dost thou detest her therefore?
No.
As e'er I heard in madness.
into some monastery, but, by chance, nothing of what
the angry law, do no stain to your own gracious
One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good:
And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain,
'Tis false.
O my dread lord,
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous,
In hand and hope of action: but we do learn
[Aside to ISABELLA]  Go to, 'tis well, away!
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you:
And you may marvel why I obscured myself,
Relate your wrongs, in what? by whom? be brief.
O, give me pardon,
fitted for 't.
to her by oath, and the nuptial appointed: between
If not a feodary, but only he
Well, my lord.
That should by private order else have died,
I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on:
O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
To three thousand dolours a year.
When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve,
'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
Pompey: you will turn good husband now, Pompey, you
I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam
That perish'd by the way: thoughts are no subjects,
Provost, a word with you.
With any scruple, your scope is as mine own
For you must know, we have with special soul
that you have said.
It is no sin at all, but charity.
We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice
Go take her hence, and marry her instantly.
Exeunt MARIANA and ISABELLA
O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!
leave. And, I beseech you, look into Master Froth
Nothing goes right: we would, and we would not.
To them accordingly.
And pull'd the law upon you.
that are fallible: tomorrow you must die, go to
O heavens!
Neither, my lord.
And yet runn'st toward him still. Thou art not noble,
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.
father died at Hallowmas: was't not at Hallowmas,
I have confess'd her and I know her virtue.
I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage: If
Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all
Came short of composition, but in chief
Than a perpetual honour. Darest thou die?
You bid me seek redemption of the devil:
Not better than he, by her own report.
Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father: do
For which the pardoner himself is in.
I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!
Who can do good on him?
I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.
Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.
What would you do?
sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very
The sense of death is most in apprehension,
He's coming, I perceive 't.
I have provided for you: stay awhile,
Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall
Well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the
What is your will?
a merciful man, good my lord.
To the hopeful execution do I leave you
That's like my brother's fault: if it confess
What but to speak of would offend again.
do you know me?
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
Until my husband bid me.
Looks in a glass, that shows what future evils,
Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword,
This is the rascal, this is he I spoke of.
I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face.
Forerunning more requital.
He hath but as offended in a dream!
nose for thy speeches?
Be an arch-villain, believe it, royal prince:
I saw them at the prison: a saucy friar,
And shamed life a hateful.
fellow partner.
Good friar, let's hear it.
The best and wholesomest spirts of the night
not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.
grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
Caesar to you, in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
By course of justice!
If he were known alive?
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.
Enter ANGELO, ESCALUS, and a Justice, Provost, Officers, and other Attendants, behind
Come, sir, I know what I know.
his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous,
Come, sir.
now. I shall crave your forbearance a little: may
I humbly thank you.
His name is Barnardine.
deceived in Angelo! If ever he return and I can
fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good
To the strict deputy, bid herself assay him:
Hail to you, provost! so I think you are.
And put your trial in the villain's mouth
Whip me? No, no, let carman whip his jade:
true, think you?
That Angelo's a murderer, is 't not strange?
him.
things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow,
But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
As long as you or I yet he must die.
this man made you, sir?
You must lay down the treasures of your body
I say, bid come before us Angelo.
lady a merited benefit, redeem your brother from
No, none, but only a repair i' the dark,
Your well defended honour, you must pardon
To what, I pray?
Our doubts are traitors
it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put
The rather for I now must make you know
[Aside]  This is his pardon, purchased by such sin
Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo,
And take the shame with joy.
Nay, but it is not so.
I got possession of Julietta's bed:
combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
Enter ISABELLA and FRANCISCA
warrant for it: it hath not moved him at all.
And sent according to command, whiles I
'Remember now my brother.'
My lord, she may be a punk, for many of them are
And that I have possess'd him my most stay
be I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.
No, my lord.
Respect to your great place! and let the devil
discover his government.
Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
I will encounter darkness as a bride,
honour two notorious benefactors.
Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,
That you might know it, would much better please me
As I do think, to-morrow.
With a light heart, trust not my holy order,
it is almost day.
Hence hath offence his quick celerity,
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Enter DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as before
My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
are.
Had I more name for badness.
No ceremony that to great ones 'longs,
to the determination of justice: yet had he framed
To this pernicious caitiff deputy,--
not be allowed in Vienna.
not drowned i' the last rain, ha? What sayest
That it becomes a virtue.
and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to
A hundred, if they'll do you any good.
Thus can the demigod Authority
Is still a dying horror!
Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy:
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
These poor informal women are no more
he is indeed Justice.
To sin in loving virtue: never could the strumpet,
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
As fancy values them, but with true prayers
unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good duke
With child, perhaps?
Well, what has he done?
And you were Isabel! should it then be thus?
Nips youth i' the head and follies doth emmew
This is the point.
O gracious duke,
velvet. Thou art the list.
Stands at a guard with envy, scarce confesses
may sigh it off. Send after the duke and appeal to
The way twice o'er.
That now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in
Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
more. Adieu, trusty Pompey. 'Bless you, friar.
For this new-married man approaching here,
By all external warrants, show it now,
By the woman's means?
He speak against me on the adverse side,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume,
This other doth command a little door
Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered,
What 'unjust'!
Only to stick it in their children's sight
think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness
If it Please your honour, I am the poor duke's
a good turn.
I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
sent thee thither. For debt, Pompey? or how?
Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
For this was of much length,--the vile conclusion
perchance of the duke's death, perchance entering
Why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done:
What figure of us think you he will bear?
Ay, sir, a mystery
A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in
Of necessary fitness?
Some run from brakes of ice, and answer none:
But graciously to know I am no better.
prepared. I am made to understand that you have
is a year and a quarter old, come Philip and Jacob:
Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar?
And leave you naked.
Exeunt Officers with MISTRESS OVERDONE
Fridays. He's not past it yet, and I say to thee,
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
as good go a mile on his errand.
Their loud applause and Aves vehement,
ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with
We have strict statutes and most biting laws.
The better, given me by so holy a man.
person, and much please the absent duke, if
Exit ELBOW
Great men may jest with saints, 'tis wit in them,
Within two hours.
Exit
Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the
Hath he a sister?
shall see how I'll handle her.
Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite,
You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
The impression of keen whips I'ld wear as rubies,
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.
And he supposes me travell'd to Poland,
our trade, and are now 'for the Lord's sake.'
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.
thou, Trot? Is the world as it was, man? Which is
SCENE II. A room in the prison.
On twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up,
Tapster, a poor widow's tapster.
Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred,
I do fear, too dreadful:
I'll have mine action of battery on thee.
And strip myself to death, as to a bed
Or whether that the body public be
Well, come to me to-morrow.
brief in goodness, but grace, being the soul of
The valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.
Yet may he live awhile, and, it may be,
Your provost knows the place where he abides
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
if bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little of
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
You had not found me here so musical:
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,
I would to heaven I had your potency,
Split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
to sit, have you not?
That to the observer doth thy history
Go, away with her to prison!
And now I give my sensual race the rein:
Enter CLAUDIO
And feast upon her eyes? What is't I dream on?
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Let but your honour know,
his demands to the point, only refer yourself to
Away, sir! you must go.
And a half, sir.
notorious bawd.
I thank your worship for your good counsel:
Reveal yourself to him.
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
to be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous
Hold you there: farewell.
Here is the head, I'll carry it myself.
Enter POMPEY
the tyrant.
What's your will, father
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
big enough, if it be too big for your thief, your
Julietta with child.
Their perch and not their terror.
I have on Angelo imposed the office,
Lord Angelo is severe.
Still thus, and thus, still worse!
If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
A bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our mystery.
come to pass, say Pompey told you so.
Ay, with my heart
But instruments of some more mightier member
Who's that which calls?
No, Pompey.
'Tis pity of him.
Exeunt ELBOW, POMPEY and Officers
Bum, sir.
We do instate and widow you withal,
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived!
Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a
And he may fetch him.
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
apparel fits your thief.
all the rest from their functions: they put forth
Commend me to my brother: soon at night
Most holy sir, I thank you.
Enter LUCIO
professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a very ill house too.
I have reserved alive.
with life that I will sue to be rid of it.
For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
sir, I would prove--
How I have ever loved the life removed
Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
That's the way, for women are light at midnight.
O heavens! what stuff is here
What think you of it?
Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at
You may, I may not, you are yet unsworn.
show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour!
Yes, I do think that you might pardon him,
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
Exit
more of you.
When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones:
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Than at the strangeness of it.
This may prove worse than hanging.
And follows close the rigour of the statute,
When, after execution, judgment hath
Go to, go to: no matter for the dish, sir.
using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery:
that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should
Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey,
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
No, my lord.
Lechery?
Are you a maid?
doubtless, and of antiquity too, bawd-born.
To LUCIO
Enter ISABELLA
To be received plain, I'll speak more gross:
Ho, by your leave!
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that,
As any in Vienna, on my word.
send for certain of my creditors: and yet, to say
My unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life,
Hungary's!
afternoon Barnardine: for my better satisfaction,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far
To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
Let me know the point.
And let it keep one shape, till custom make it
that my report: you, indeed, spoke so of him, and
she would sooner confess: perchance, publicly,
You shall not be admitted to his sight.
Teach her the way.
What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in the
consent to die this day, that's certain.
Courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that
It is not my consent,
And credulous to false prints.
By which he should revive: and even so
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
I never heard the absent duke much detected for
sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the
Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home,
Exit
Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant,
I have kept it myself, and see how he goes about to abuse me!
Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak:
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Governs Lord Angelo, a man whose blood
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
To have it added to the faults of mine,
He will not wake.
Believe me, on mine honour,
Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see
house-eaves, because they are lecherous. The duke
My brother did love Juliet,
My lord hath sent you this note, and by me this
A kneaded clod, and the delighted spirit
Then must your brother die.
Sweet sister, let me live:
Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood,
With less respect than we do minister
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Come, fear you not: good counsellors lack no
I'll make all speed.
Friar, not I	I have been drinking hard all night,
What's he?
envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier.
woman after this downright way of creation: is it
By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe,
Give up your keys.
I am sorry that such sorrow I procure:
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio:
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
dearer love.
upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This
First, let her show her face, and after speak.
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you,
The duke comes home to-morrow, nay, dry your eyes,
If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can, but if he be a
That's bitter to sweet end.
good Christians ought to have.
Be it as your wisdom will.
That I, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'd
To make a false one.
are: but precise villains they are, that I am sure
By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end:
That's he indeed.
Who is it that hath died for this offence?
What man thou art.
In action all of precept, he did show me
Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?
in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted
in.
game of tick-tack. I'll to her.
Nay, hear me, Isabel.
poor gentlewoman: there she lost a noble and
Well, my lord.
'Cucullus non facit monachum:' honest in nothing
called before us. Away with her to prison! Go to,
Please but your honour hear me.
His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
A warrant for his execution.
Let there be some more test made of my metal,
And dispossessing all my other parts
We kill the fowl of season: shall we serve heaven
upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have
To draw with idle spiders' strings
hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand
With profits of the mind, study and fast.
Nay, but hear me.
As all comforts are, most good, most good indeed.
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
Doth he so seek his life?
Not so, not so, his life is parallel'd
Attorney'd at your service.
with an unpitied whipping, for you have been a
There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell you:
My strength can give you: then no more remains,
I fear you not.
From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,
As they themselves would owe them.
He's hearing of a cause, he will come straight
Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY
Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.
Lights that do mislead the morn:
Right.
Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable
How now, Abhorson? what's the news with you?
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
Admit no other way to save his life,--
seems he to be touched?
are amazed, but this shall absolutely resolve you.
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
Unveiling
To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth
her recompense: and here, by this, is your brother
MARIANA veiled, ISABELLA, and FRIAR PETER, at their  stand. Enter DUKE VINCENTIO, VARRIUS, Lords,  ANGELO, ESCALUS, LUCIO, Provost, Officers, and Citizens, at several doors
Away with her! Poor soul,
Enter, severally, DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as a friar, and Provost
To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean:
By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected
To ANGELO
The steeled gaoler is the friend of men.
Bound by my charity and my blest order,
What is the news from this good deputy?
Alas, alas!
Come, officer, away!
Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth
I can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.
are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them, I
Where is the provost?
Women! Help Heaven! men their creation mar
As Angelo, even so may Angelo,
Happy return be to your royal grace!
Must he needs die?
Adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
Grace to stand, and virtue go,
To weed my vice and let his grow!
Behold, behold. where Madam Mitigation comes! I
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
security enough to make fellowships accurst: much
Thou shalt not do't.
When it deserves, with characters of brass,
Must either punish me, not being believed,
yet would have dark deeds darkly answered, he would
understand, the greater file of the subject held the
Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison,
Pardon me, noble lord:
I'll be hanged first: thou art deceived in me,
O, did you so? And do you remember what you said of the duke?
him to prison! Where is the provost? Away with him
Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.
How now, sir! What's your name? and what's the matter?
Intents but merely thoughts.
And nothing of your answer.
Master Barnardine!
Go in to him, and fetch him out.
I have known my husband, yet my husband
Gives me this instance: already he hath carried
dangerous courtesy.
A Bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred, one
dish of some three-pence, your honours have seen
Re-enter Provost
prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your
And squarest thy life according. Thou'rt condemn'd:
I swear I will not die to-day for any man's
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
friar. But no more of this. Canst thou tell if
I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: I
I now begin with grief and shame to utter:
When it is born in high authority:
Will't please you walk aside?
Nay, but I know 'tis so: I saw him arrested, saw
Bear me to prison, where I am committed.
True.
Now, good my lord,
I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
O, let him marry her.
Either new, or by remissness new-conceived,
Enter ANGELO
shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these
Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you
I am come to know your pleasure.
reports, but the best is, he lives not in them.
fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
So to offend him still. This night's the time
What say you to this, sir?
I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.
cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very
Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen
I thank thee, Varrius, thou hast made good haste:
Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
And six or seven winters more respect
And some condemned for a fault alone.
speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or
Or seem so craftily, and that's not good.
Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
For Angelo,
Though they would swear down each particular saint,
Of whence are you?
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
I come about my brother.
How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no,
Is it not strange and strange?
And leave you to the hearing of the cause,
That life is better life, past fearing death,
Not within, sir.
Exit FROTH
'Twixt you and your poor brother.
trick. If you will hang me for it, you may, but I
you from dishonour in doing it.
Provost, a word with you!
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she
so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd:
I hope you will not mock me with a husband.
ACT V
Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
The law against it! But that her tender shame
Well, what's your suit?
substitute, and to save your brother?
bed, give him promise of satisfaction. I will
To undergo such ample grace and honour,
How may likeness made in crimes,
To call him villain? and then to glance from him
One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.
That banish what they sue for, redeem thy brother
Woe me! for what?
So.
That you extol me thus?
Besides, upon the very siege of justice
But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
O you beast!
Remaining in the coffer of her friends,
If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer
The one has my pity, not a jot the other,
To use it like a giant.
Here is the sister of the man condemn'd
Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the duke.
To have free speech with you, and it concerns me
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Thou bear's thy heavy riches but a journey,
Starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man, and young
Thank you, good Pompey, and, in requital of your
Therefore your best appointment make with speed,
things should be: all difficulties are but easy
Exit Messenger
Ay, sir, whom, I thank heaven, is an honest woman,--
Look that you love your wife, her worth worth yours.
further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you.
I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
Do you the office, friar, which consummate,
As I have heard him swear himself there's one
you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister of
the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his
Always obedient to your grace's will,
Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo:
When vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended,
And perform an old contracting.
Nay, it is ten times strange.
bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet
For I am that way going to temptation,
To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose
I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my
There spake my brother, there my father's grave
Can lay on nature is a paradise
SCENE II. The street before the prison.
I was once before him for getting a wench with child.
A merriment than a vice.
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Pardon, my lord, I will not show my face
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
Here in the prison, father,
Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
signet is not strange to you.
With whispering and most guilty diligence,
look,--do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?
O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?
of profession: one would think it were Mistress
Exit Servant
Overdone's own house, for here be many of her old
fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
not heard of the proclamation, have you?
In very good time: speak not you to him till we
Who knew of Your intent and coming hither?
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go:
in your ward sufficient to serve it?
The evil that thou causest to be done,
To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
him by the year, and let him abide here with you, if
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in
Lest I might be too rash:
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
But what likelihood is in that?
To your worship's house, sir?
Making practise on the times,
And you, good brother father. What offence hath
report you.
shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.
Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
There he must stay until the officer
Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
Twice treble shame on Angelo,
Blessed be your royal grace!
And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
To LUCIO
The heavens give safety to your purposes!
Sir, make me not your story.
Be perfect.
Had time cohered with place or place with wishing,
That make her good? O, let her brother live!
O, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
How came it that the absent duke had not either
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead,
Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?
Injurious world! most damned Angelo!
And must be buried but as an intent
I will not do't.
Dispose of her
It is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed:
But as we stand in fear,--
As much in mock as mark.
Are there no other tokens
cut off a woman's head.
First, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
provost, honesty and constancy: if I read it not
Mutually.
I'll lend you all my life to do you service.
No? you say your husband.
And general honour.
Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested,
some, he is in Rome: but where is he, think you?
O, the better, sir, for he that drinks all night,
Gladly, my lord.
In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and
Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we
do you think of the trade, Pompey? is it a lawful trade?
By heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak'st,
constable. How long have you been in this place of constable?
Being criminal, in double violation
Under your good correction, I have seen,
Master Deep-vow, and Master Copperspur, and Master
And hold no longer out.
And charges him my lord, with such a time
Though angel on the outward side!
Exit ESCALUS
My holy sir, none better knows than you
Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough,
The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
composition with the King of Hungary, why then all
and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the
what news?
And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
SCENE IV. A room in ANGELO's house.
Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of
Imagine howling: 'tis too horrible!
Well, well, there's one yonder arrested and carried
And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father,
Drop-heir that killed lusty Pudding, and Master
Most manifest, and not denied by himself.
Too late? why, no, I, that do speak a word.
That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant,
Friar Lodowick to be a dishonest person?
These letters at fit time deliver me
If I would yield him my virginity,
Take him hence, to the rack with him! We'll touse you
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little,
A novice of this place and the fair sister
Exit Servant
Hath blister'd her report: she is with child,
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
Forbear it therefore, give your cause to heaven.
To look into the bottom of my place:
Is there no remedy?
To some more fitter place, and that with speed.
Pray you, do.
Grace of the duke, revenges to your heart,
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
You would have slipt like him, but he, like you,
As near the dawning, provost, as it is,
Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that
And I confess besides I am no maid:
The damned'st body to invest and cover
If the law would allow it, sir.
I do confess it, and repent it, father.
Is very snow-broth, one who never feels
confession, learn to begin thy health, but, whilst I
Hear me yourself, for that which I must speak
Kneeling
you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor
[To Provost]  Stay, sir, stay awhile.
Not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is I
remembered, that such a one and such a one were past
How should he be made, then?
There is a prone and speechless dialect,
Do with your injuries as seems you best,
Become them with one half so good a grace
treasonable abuses!
To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And he, that suffer's. O, it is excellent
How it goes with us, and do look to know
sounder all the next day.
Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour
But fetter you till death.
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
O my dear lord,
Words against me? this is a good friar, belike!
Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she
I would say the truth, but to accuse him so,
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
But judge you as you are? O, think on that,
Envelope you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower,
SCENE I. The city gate.
Let him be whipt and hang'd.
Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily
That is, were I under the terms of death,
My lord, I must confess I know this woman:
Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.
you are to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort
I told you. Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss
Come hither to me, Master Elbow, come hither, Master
FRIAR PETER and ISABELLA come forward
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to do
From their abominable and beastly touches
Peace be with you!
After him, fellows, bring him to the block.
Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
This being granted in course,--and now follows
And try your penitence, if it be sound,
Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.
Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the
Now are they come.
Or hollowly put on.
not be long, that the time may have all shadow and
O, fie, fie, fie!
Master Froth?
'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the
would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a
Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to
Such as move men, beside, she hath prosperous art
To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
As make the angels weep, who, with our spleens,
Repented o'er his doom.
None, but that there is so great a fever on
I am affianced this man's wife as strongly
'An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!'
Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied
To-morrow! O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him!
Away with him to death!
That shall not be much amiss: Yet, as the matter
But he must die to-morrow?
thief thinks it little enough: so every true man's
all.
To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother:
I, in probation of a sisterhood,
trick of it?
Good night to your redress! Is the duke gone?
The image of it gives me content already, and I
The matter being afoot, keep your instruction,
Before so noble and so great a figure
I know you'ld fain be gone. An officer!
We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Of the all-building law, and that there were
SCENE IV. A room in ANGELO's house.
At what hour to-morrow
Come hither, Isabel.
Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
Exit Provost
executed, and sleep afterwards.
be this morning executed, and his head born to Angelo.
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
This sensible warm motion to become
I have not yet made known to Mariana
I warrant your honour.
How say you?
Hath set the women on to this complaint:
And hold you ever to our special drift,
Drest in a little brief authority,
The warrants for yourself, take heed to't.
Fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd!
What pleasure was he given to?
Pray you, be gone.
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes,
What sin you do to save a brother's life,
His old betrothed but despised,
And you.
In such a one as, you consenting to't,
Prefix'd by Angelo: see this be done,
Exeunt
What news, friar, of the duke?
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite,
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
As mercy does.
Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then.
Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain and
That no particular scandal once can touch
I would not--though 'tis my familiar sin
from the world! What corruption in this life, that
Falls into forfeit: he arrests him on it,
so with him.
That is, a woman, if you be more, you're none,
To lingering sufferance. Answer me to-morrow,
Are not thine own so proper as to waste
And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter:
Ha!
He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
Hourly afflict: merely, thou art death's fool,
good purpose. Doth your honour mark his face?
leisure have discredited to him, and now is he
Exeunt
To die for't!
By every syllable a faithful verity:
Let's write good angel on the devil's horn:
You could not with more tame a tongue desire it:
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
Claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished
Exit DUKE
If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse
proceeding, it shall become him well, wherein if he
Stand more for number than for accompt.
'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.
O worthy duke,
What, ho, Barnardine!
Which have for long run by the hideous law,
presently to Saint Luke's: there, at the moated
Peace and prosperity! Who is't that calls
entering, that if any crave redress of injustice,
a three-piled piece, I warrant thee: I had as lief
You will demand of me why I do this?
Who's that, I pray thee?
O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
Ay, and more.
Enter Provost, CLAUDIO, JULIET, and Officers
Enter LUCIO
Did not I tell thee yea? hadst thou not order?
To ISABELLA
In self-same manner doth accuse my husband,
How I may formally in person bear me
They say, best men are moulded out of faults,
Enter DUKE VINCENTIO and FRIAR THOMAS
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are
Enter ISABELLA
There is a kind of character in thy life,
had rather it would please you I might be whipt.
To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
I have a brother is condemn'd to die:
Whipt first, sir, and hanged after.
your appointment, go in your place, if the encounter
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice:
will keep the house.
The offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
How now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?
And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.
Show me how, good father.
O, sir, you must: and therefore I beseech you
your whores, sir, being members of my occupation,
a thousand: he had some feeling of the sport: he
And so it is received. Now, pious sir,
O place and greatness! millions of false eyes
And tell him where I stay: give the like notice
If the first that did the edict infringe
It is the law, not I condemn your brother:
I grant, as there may between the lists and the
'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman baldpate:
But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.
Harp not on that, nor do not banish reason
Love you the man that wrong'd you?
Proceeded to you, therefore take your honours.
That so sweetly were forsworn,
No longer staying but to give the mother
Good sir, adieu.
Like man new made.
Why 'her unhappy brother'? let me ask,
well that prays for peace.
ISABELLA is carried off guarded, and MARIANA comes forward
Exeunt
for the which you are to do me both a present and a
howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you
Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
To justify this worthy nobleman,
Becomes more mock'd than fear'd, so our decrees,
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
noise there? What are you?
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
What, is't murder?
She that accuses him of fornication,
What, in metre?
I promised here to meet.
advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid
Another thing to fall. I not deny,
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer:
Claudio die to-morrow or no?
As she that he hath stain'd?
But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so.
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
Your friends, sir, the hangman. You must be so
continued in it some time. You say, seven years together?
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
advisings: to the love I have in doing good a
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
What news abroad i' the world?
And to transport him in the mind he is
Why, 'tis good, it is the right of it, it must be
my head fill my belly, one fruitful meal would set
He calls again, I pray you, answer him.
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm:
Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?
Come your ways, sir, come.
Than this is all as true as it is strange:
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads,
To qualify in others: were he meal'd with that
Yes. Has he affections in him,
In countenance! Heaven shield your grace from woe,
thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love,
Go to kennel, Pompey, go.
Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall,
As much for my poor brother as myself:
No, I would tell what 'twere to be a judge,
With all her double vigour, art and nature,
O, death's a great disguiser, and you may add to it.
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
The jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
Well, I do so.
Pray you, let's hear.
to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence, he
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
Tongue far from heart--play with all virgins so:
Did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.
executioner, who in his office lacks a helper: if
One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the
As to put metal in restrained means
Are you agreed?
I have done so, but he's not to be found.
Take thy commission.
For what I bid them do: for we bid this be done,
Or else he must not only die the death,
If you head and hang all that offend that way but
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
Thou art the first knave that e'er madest a duke.
I have bethought me of another fault.
That dost this habitation, where thou keep'st,
I do, and bear the shame most patiently.
If he be less, he's nothing, but he's more,
How! know you where you are?
O, your desert speaks loud, and I should wrong it,
habit no loss shall touch her by my company.
[To ESCALUS]  What you have spoke I pardon: sit you down:
That took away the match from Isabel,
She speaks this in the infirmity of sense.
Which is that Barnardine?
To enter publicly: him I'll desire
No.
And those eyes, the break of day,
custom-shrunk.
SCENE I. The moated grange at ST. LUKE's.
I am a woeful suitor to your honour,
Anchors on Isabel: Heaven in my mouth,
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if
not to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.'
hath made him that gracious denial which he is most
I'll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst
Which for this nineteen years we have let slip,
Like a true friar. More reasons for this action
craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.
A man already made, as to remit
O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the
By throwing it on any other object
Under your sentence?
fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.
To find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived.
Ay, touch him, there's the vein.
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?
Now took your brother's life, or, to redeem him,
We have made inquiry of you, and we hear
I think thou dost, and, indeed, with most painful
a more penitent trade than your bawd, he doth
Turn you the key, and know his business of him,
'Tis best thou diest quickly.
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
Lord Angelo? they have confessed you did.
depends on it than we must yet deliver. Thus fail
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot,
your knees and make ready.
Slander to the state! Away with him to prison!
imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. But indeed I
Proof?
And to set on this wretched woman here
Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question, you
Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman.
It may be right, but you are i' the wrong
The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
My lord, most villanously, believe it.
Thou camest here to complain.
Exit
'Tis not the devil's crest.
At an unusual hour?
That want no ear but yours.
Till she herself confess it.
Pray, sir, in what?
Ay, my good lord, a very virtuous maid,
cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
He--to give fear to use and liberty,
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
I something do excuse the thing I hate,
I do it not in evil disposition,
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept:
If He, which is the top of judgment, should
much in request, for the old women were all dead.
solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea,
[Within]  Away, you rogue, away! I am sleepy.
Exeunt
Kneeling
I do not like the man: had he been lay, my lord
Enter ISABELLA and MARIANA
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
Pulls off the friar's hood, and discovers DUKE VINCENTIO
impiety has made a feast of thee.
Are now to have no successive degrees,
Enter a Servant
Make us pay down for our offence by weight
Unmuffles CLAUDIO
I will, as 'twere a brother of your order,
Who hath a story ready for your ear.
upon you, and, I pray you, your name?
The contents of this is the return of the duke: you
That's I, an't like your grace:
I thought, by your readiness in the office, you had
No, pardon, 'tis a secret must be locked within the
promise-keeping.
So please you, this friar hath been with him, and
I do, my lord.
Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the
Come you hither to me, Master tapster. What's your
More than our brother is our chastity.
any thing which professed to make him rejoice: a
You have told me too many of him already, sir, if
Condemn'd upon the act of fornication
trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my
Re-enter Provost, with BARNARDINE, CLAUDIO muffled, and JULIET
I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as
From thee, even from thy virtue!
Immediate sentence then and sequent death
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
lent him visitation.
I have a motion much imports your good,
news is old enough, yet it is every day's news. I
Hark how I'll bribe you: good my lord, turn back.
I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
Knows not that ever he knew me.
His friends still wrought reprieves for him: and,
Were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?
Heaven keep your honour safe!
Enter DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as before
Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
to steal. There's not a soldier of us all, that, in
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Will so your accusation overweigh,
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
Exit
Hold up your hands, say nothing, I'll speak all.
To my house. Fare you well.
And hug it in mine arms.
I should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
But that to your sufficiency as your Worth is able,
Be executed by nine to-morrow morning:
Do you hear how he misplaces?
For that her reputation was disvalued
his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish: the
We are all frail.
novelty is only in request, and it is as dangerous
What are you, sir?
Through it do well, I do not relish well
she, that this house, if it be not a bawd's house,
SCENE VI. Street near the city gate.
controversy: as, for example, thou thyself art a
Would not have been so stern.
No? a dozen times at least.
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
And to that vineyard is a planched gate,
certain that when he makes water his urine is
His neck will come to your waist,--a cord, sir.
For so I have strew'd it in the common ear,
It is not truer he is Angelo
What, is there a maid with child by him?
No word to save thee.
By cold gradation and well-balanced form,
change your trade, I'll be your tapster still.
for me here to-day? much upon this time have
[Aside]                  She speaks, and 'tis
Come hither, Mariana.
To a determined scope.
renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most
Enter ESCALUS, Provost, and Officers with MISTRESS OVERDONE
And let them work. The nature of our people,
Are not these large enough?
I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo,
Which is the wiser here? Justice or Iniquity? Is
How know you that?
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger:
For better times to come. Friar, advise him,
All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.
Never crave him, we are definitive.
Pray you, take note of it: and when you have
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be
manifested effect, I crave but four days' respite,
but yet I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I
Did you such a thing?
Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
was begot between two stock-fishes. But it is
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale,--
For common justice, you're as pregnant in
By vain though apt affection.
How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of
That's seal'd in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice:
spit in his face, so she defied him.
proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own
Exit
Methinks I see a quickening in his eye.
That skins the vice o' the top. Go to your bosom,
If she be mad,--as I believe no other,--
My lord, I know him, 'tis a meddling friar,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.
This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness:
Our city's institutions, and the terms
[Aside to ISABELLA]  Art avised o' that? more on 't.
A woman.
Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me,
He hath got his friend with child.
Look forward on the journey you shall go.
Exit
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown:
Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
My body up to shame.
A pond as deep as hell.
Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?
Of palsied eld, and when thou art old and rich,
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself:
Freshly on me: 'tis surely for a name.
Hath she had any more than one husband?
constable, and my name is Elbow: I do lean upon
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
At any time 'fore noon.
My very worthy cousin, fairly met!
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
SCENE III. Another room in the same.
So happy is your brother.
Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
constable's wife any harm? I would know that of
My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour,--
is writ. Look, the unfolding star calls up the
Exit Provost
Rely upon it till my tale be heard,
When I'll depose I had him in mine arms
I do repent me, as it is an evil,
your honour.
Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master
He must before the deputy, sir, he has given him
Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
This is a thing that Angelo knows not, for he this
She it is.
Exeunt
avouch the justice of your dealing?
When men were fond, I smiled and wonder'd how.
SCENE I. An apartment in the DUKE'S palace.
Grace go with you, Benedicite!
Nay, tarry, I'll go along with thee
For I have had such faults, but rather tell me,
And I am going with instruction to him.
For being a little bad: so may my husband.
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round
Made me a looker on here in Vienna,
Just of his colour. What if we do omit
Why,
Has censured him
And how shall we continue Claudio,
But my kisses bring again, bring again,
That is your part: yet I am advised to do it,
they not malefactors?
Come on, mistress: here's a gentlewoman denies all
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood
will be considered.
one out of the table.
[Aside to ISABELLA]  Give't not o'er so: to him
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and
By so receiving a dishonour'd life
motion generative, that's infallible.
Die, perish! Might but my bending down
What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
it will let this man live! But how out of this can she avail?
to prison, Pompey?
Or with an outstretch'd throat I'll tell the world aloud
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
That I desire to hear her speak again,
time has yet to come that she was ever respected
Hath look'd upon my passes. Then, good prince,
imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I
What, I prithee, might be the cause?
will relent,
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
My patience here is touch'd. I do perceive
him.
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
Wherein--let no man hear me--I take pride,
knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.
Ay, so I did indeed.
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
me yare, for truly, sir, for your kindness I owe you
when they are known. Call your executioner, and off
Marry, I thank your worship for it. Thou seest, thou
delivered him to his liberty or executed him? I
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.
Ha! little honour to be much believed,
Than faults may shake our frames,--let me be bold,
of natures: she, having the truth of honour in her,
furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify, that
Yea.
have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
Craft against vice I must apply:
Is true and false, and what he with his oath
speech we had to such a purpose.
like an impediment in the current, made it more
Exit ANGELO
Enter, on one side, DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as before, on the other, ELBOW, and Officers with POMPEY
No, my good lord, it was by private message.
A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better
To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
You will think you have made no offence, if the duke
My lord, I do confess I ne'er was married,
after three-pence a bay: if you live to see this
Do you call, sir?
There have I made my promise
Re-enter Provost
to be constant in any undertaking. There is scarce
met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.
SCENE I. A room in the prison.
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
Heaven give your spirits comfort!
I have great hope in that, for in her youth
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?
Found out the remedy. How would you be,
There's many have committed it.
that let me inform you.
clients: though you change your place, you need not
it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp
prisoner the very debt of your calling. I have
Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
A league below the city, and from thence,
Keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time
He cannot, sir, he's out at elbow.
I did but smile till now:
the dukes fall upon the king.
Giving letters
That you shall stifle in your own report
None, since the curfew rung.
which time of the contract and limit of the
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
I have a servant comes with me along,
a commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in
In levity: since which time of five years
none of Pygmalion's images, newly made woman, to be
Either this is the envy in you, folly, or mistaking:
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.
For we are soft as our complexions are,
Exeunt
i' the morn, I'll call you at your house: give
Of your own cause. Is this the witness, friar?
Nay, I beseech you, mark it well.
Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind,
Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so,
I'll send him certain word of my success.
In your close patience.
Re-enter Officers with ISABELLA, and Provost with the DUKE VINCENTIO in his friar's habit
All sects, all ages smack of this vice, and he
Who will believe thee, Isabel?
You are too cold, if you should need a pin,
Go to, let that be mine:
And you but waste your words.
Is't not a kind of incest, to take life
That Angelo's forsworn, is it not strange?
notable fellow.
Should be as holy as severe,
For my poor brother's head.
Now, sir, to you.
teeth and the lips: but this I can let you
You shall hear more ere morning.
is herself in the tub.
Why, very well, I hope here be truths. He, sir,
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world:
Must needs appear offence.
But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
good dishes,--
to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I loved thy brother:
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a
Enter ABHORSON
Heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit,
And hide the false seems true.
We'll borrow place of him.
With all the effect of love.
wicked varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art
Exeunt
Men give like gods, but when they weep and kneel,
prison, and there's Madam Juliet.
art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak
have you whipt: so, for this time, Pompey, fare you well.
I think it well:
Before his sister should her body stoop
The phrase is to the matter.
withdrawing.
If he had been as you and you as he,
And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
Will greet us here anon, my gentle Varrius.
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request,
As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom
duke's time, he promised her marriage: his child
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
I, now the voice of the recorded law,
Friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as I do:
He's not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
he's a better woodman than thou takest him for.
Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
with the other confederate companion!
Besides, you know, it draws something near to the
With character too gross is writ on Juliet.
Upon the heavy middle of the night
One of our convent, and his confessor,
That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art,
mistress is a respected woman.
your worship's pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?
One that, above all other strifes, contended
I'll privily away. I love the people,
Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?
rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very
Enter DUKE VINCENTIO, ESCALUS, Lords and Attendants
He's sentenced, 'tis too late.
I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
I've hope to live, and am prepared to die.
Away! let's go learn the truth of it.
further charge, that you swerve not from the
Why, thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar,
Than beauty could, display'd. But mark me,
That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd
All-hallond eve.
Exit Provost
cardinally given, might have been accused in
With Angelo to-night shall lie
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
Either of condemnation or approof,
How? thy wife?
So. What trade are you of, sir?
And here comes Claudio's pardon.
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from
For being a bawd, for being a bawd.
This day my sister should the cloister enter
I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
ninescore and seventeen pounds, of which he made
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
Assay the power you have.
And take her hence in horror.
What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or mine?
Enter ANGELO
wears for his sake, and he, a marble to her tears,
Of burning youth.
Sirrah, no more!
And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his
Enter ISABELLA
There shall be order for't.
from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself
You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
O, sir, you are deceived.
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison,
Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus,
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?
Might there not be a charity in sin
knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Arise to let him in: he is call'd up.
place call upon me, and dispatch with Angelo, that
And most desire should meet the blow of justice,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.
show much like to madness: pray heaven his wisdom be
extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What
Is this the man that you did tell us of?
Who, not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty, and
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.
Most wrongfully accused your substitute,
Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.
His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
hours since, and he was ever precise in
[Aside to ISABELLA]
To save this brother's life?
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power
we jest now, think you?
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder
O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
To think I can be undiscernible,
Enter Provost and POMPEY
Correction and instruction must both work
it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr, I shall stick.
Go to, sir, you weigh equally, a feather will turn
To him, I say!
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps.
And let the subject see, to make them know
Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.
great traveller, and wild Half-can that stabbed
shall anon over-read it at your pleasure, where you
As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand:
Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.
The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
To cleave a heart in twain.
I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.
when he is worst, he is little better than a beast:
A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine:
SCENE VII. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house.
A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch
Or I am much deceived, of Portia.
'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'
Where is the horse that doth untread again
Many that have at times made moan to me,
Come, you and I will thither presently,
That, in the course of justice, none of us
I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano,
shall see a masque, but if you do, then it was not
Our feast shall be much honour'd in your marriage.
honest Antonio,--O that I had a title good enough
How now, Lorenzo!
And these assume but valour's excrement
That you would wear it till your hour of death
sins of my mother should be visited upon me.
And in the morning early will we both
borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman and
Be content and seek no new,
Here comes Lorenzo: more of this hereafter.
Reads
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
And ne'er a true one.
That light we see is burning in my hall.
Antonio shall become bound, well.
I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than
No masque to-night: the wind is come about,
and my old Venetian friend Salerio?
hanging about the neck of my heart, says very wisely
Hear me yet, good Shylock.
in peril of my life with the edge of a feather-bed,
than any man in all Venice. His reasons are as two
To please his grandam, never trust me more.
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
Comes to the privy coffer of the state,
Enter NERISSA with a Servitor
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees
And neither man nor master would take aught
I freely told you, all the wealth I had
That were a kind of bastard hope, indeed: so the
The skull that bred them in the sepulchre.
to light, murder cannot be hid long, a man's son
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
I could not do withal, then I'll repent,
dangerous flat and fatal, where the carcasses of many
About my moneys and my usances:
follows his own instructions: I can easier teach
Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed
Do it in hope of fair advantages:
Who's there?
I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke Of love,
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack,
tell us, do you hear whether Antonio have had any
Commends him to you.
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
What talk you of the posy or the value?
Is that my prize? are my deserts no better?
Sir, I would speak with you.
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof,
deep glass of rhenish wine on the contrary casket,
To wind about my love with circumstance,
I am dumb.
That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince
Such as the day is when the sun is hid.
And comes to his election presently.
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath,
SCENE II. The same. A street.
enemies, and what's his reason? I am a Jew. Hath
Enter LORENZO
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.
Tarry a little, there is something else.
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
Let me play the fool:
would she were hearsed at my foot, and the ducats in
Unto the state of Venice.
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.
Are safely come to road.
And he repents not that he pays your debt,
Queen o'er myself: and even now, but now,
And you in love shall not deny me this.
Where Cressid lay that night.
To a most dangerous sea, the beauteous scarf
Thyself shalt see the act:
If Hercules and Lichas play at dice
And therefore, like herself, wise, fair and true,
Which, but for him that had your husband's ring,
Antonio is a good man.
swear that I have a poor pennyworth in the English.
In measure rein thy joy, scant this excess.
Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more
Besides, it should appear, that if he had
Take leave of thy old master and inquire
Patiently to bear my wroth.
A tucket sounds
Hath been most sound: I charge you by the law,
For all the world like cutler's poetry
You cannot better be employ'd, Bassanio,
sufficient. Yet his means are in supposition: he
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my
hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the
Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest,
your prophet the Nazarite conjured the devil into. I
More guarded than his fellows': see it done.
Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils,
and have a desire, as my father shall specify--
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich,
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
parrots. Go in, sirrah, bid them prepare for dinner.
Exeunt
Stephano is my name, and I bring word
And what is music then? Then music is
here's a simple line of life: here's a small trifle
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
Proceed to judgment: by my soul I swear
Chance as fair and choose as true!
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.
It is the most impenetrable cur
Some there be that shadows kiss,
Let me say 'amen' betimes, lest the devil cross my
To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
To one that would have him help to waste
daughter for a monkey.
The first, of gold, who this inscription bears,
Are you acquainted with the difference
He did entreat me, past all saying nay,
To have it baned? What, are you answer'd yet?
And either not attempt to choose at all
To render them redoubted! Look on beauty,
Enter a Serving-man
Now lays upon you.
Than to be under sail and gone to-night.
Exeunt Arragon and train
What judgment shall I dread, doing
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Exeunt JESSICA and LORENZO
The court awards it, and the law doth give it.
them prepare dinner.
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit
Let not the sound of shallow foppery enter
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
imposition depending on the caskets.
Young in limbs, in judgment old,
His tedious measures with the unbated fire
And see the holy edifice of stone,
Defy the matter. How cheerest thou, Jessica?
That ever kept with men.
Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,
But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech you,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
The man that hath no music in himself,
than to either of these. God defend me from these
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
How could he see to do them? having made one,
Then, if he lose, he makes a swan-like end,
Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
We have been praying for our husbands' healths,
Why sweat they under burthens? let their beds
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.
Thou makest thy knife keen, but no metal can,
I know the hand: in faith, 'tis a fair hand,
hose in France, his bonnet in Germany and his
O my Antonio, had I but the means
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture,
Nay, we will slink away in supper-time,
Well, tell me now what lady is the same
Which pries not to the interior, but, like the martlet,
Speak not so grossly. You are all amazed:
Madam, there is alighted at your gate
and discourse grow commendable in none only but
Use all the observance of civility,
And know how well I have deserved the ring,
This is the fool that lent out money gratis:
This letter from Bellario doth commend
Give me my principal, and let me go.
To Christian intercessors. Follow not,
I was enforced to send it after him,
Descend, for you must be my torchbearer.
From Lisbon, Barbary and India?
Exit Gratiano
Be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
Why then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano,
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
God, sir, and he hath enough.
SCENE I. Venice. A street.
Never to speak to lady afterward
rightly but one who shall rightly love. But what
never fell upon our nation till now, I never felt it
Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold:
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew
Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
Hath full relation to the penalty,
O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge!
Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty,
married to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.
And there will we abide. I do desire you
The other half in use, to render it,
And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
behavior every where.
Then must the Jew be merciful.
I have a mind presages me such thrift,
by the will of a dead father. Is it not hard,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.
I would entreat you rather to put on
have them, they are not worth the search.
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand:
I would not draw them, I would have my bond.
From any dram of mercy.
Fading in music: that the comparison
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear:
Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
Neapolitan's, a better bad habit of frowning than
Beshrew me but I love her heartily,
nor Italian, and you will come into the court and
appropriation to his own good parts, that he can
How much more elder art thou than thy looks!
Immediately to leave you and be gone.
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh,
Who, inward search'd, have livers white as milk,
It must appear in other ways than words,
More than the wild-cat: drones hive not with me,
O happy torment, when my torturer
your worship shall know by this honest old man, and,
Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely,
That is done too, sir, only 'cover' is the word.
To unburden all my plots and purposes
Is he not able to discharge the money?
Enter GRATIANO, LORENZO, SALARINO, and SALANIO
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you
own child. Well, old man, I will tell you news of
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.
Consisteth of all nations. Therefore, go:
Believe me, you are marvellously changed.
the knave and get thee, I am much deceived. But,
I pray you, have in mind where we must meet.
Than any that draws breath in Italy.
night fourscore ducats.
That she did give me, whose posy was
'Tis very true: O wise and upright judge!
SCENE II. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house.
And many Jasons come in quest of her.
Sola! did you see Master Lorenzo?
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
You, merchant, have you any thing to say?
That's certain, if the devil may be her judge.
Exeunt Duke and his train
And not one vessel 'scape the dreadful touch
As his wise mother wrought in his behalf,
As shall conveniently become you there:'
Good fortune then!
ACT V
I have no mind of feasting forth to-night:
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy,
and water-rats, water-thieves and land-thieves, I
SCENE V. The same. A garden.
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.
Why, this bond is forfeit,
Why, this is like the mending of highways
backward: I am sure he had more hair of his tail
Which make such wanton gambols with the wind,
And so have I address'd me. Fortune now
To have her love, provided that your fortune
And never be Bassanio so for me:
I am very glad of it: I'll plague him, I'll torture
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears,
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
There is a written scroll! I'll read the writing.
Hath an argosy cast away, coming from Tripolis.
And claim her with a loving kiss.
Let him alone:
No, by my honour, madam, by my soul,
true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the
Your wife would give you little thanks for that,
He shall do this, or else I do recant
Let me have judgment and the Jew his will.
He seek the life of any citizen,
would, sir, as my father shall specify--
That such a thing bechanced would make me sad?
When I am in my coach, which stays for us
I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo,
Good sentences and well pronounced.
I wish your ladyship all heart's content.
With over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails,
Which here appeareth due upon the bond.
Of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter!
Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
I shall obey you in all fair commands.
Your fortune stood upon the casket there,
To gaze on Christian fools with varnish'd faces,
You have a noble and a true conceit
for in converting Jews to Christians, you raise the
I cannot find it, 'tis not in the bond.
rather he should shrive me than wive me. Come,
his horn full of good news: my master will be here
And here, I take it, is the doctor come.
This house, these servants and this same myself
That therefore only are reputed wise
No better a musician than the wren.
uncapable of pity, void and empty
You have among you many a purchased slave,
you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
I wish you all the joy that you can wish,
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?
What, must I hold a candle to my shames?
Come, good Lorenzo. Fare ye well awhile:
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I will be with you.
my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come: give me
Now, what news on the Rialto?
give me your blessing: I am Launcelot, your boy
Thou shalt have justice, more than thou desirest.
Do not draw back your hand, I'll take no more,
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger
I'll end my exhortation after dinner.
What, and stake down?
And for thy life let justice be accused.
To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
Exeunt
Exit with his train. Flourish of cornets
lost a ship.
The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive
'Tis now but four o'clock: we have two hours
that made the wings she flew withal.
And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
The other half comes to the general state,
matched, unless the devil himself turn Jew.
Live thou, I live: with much, much more dismay
And shuddering fear, and green-eyed jealousy! O love,
The four strangers seek for you, madam, to take
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring:
How much unlike art thou to Portia!
Give him the ring, and bring him, if thou canst,
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
To whom I am a neighbour and near bred.
And true she is, as she hath proved herself,
fifth, the Prince of Morocco, who brings word the
I have engaged myself to a dear friend,
Enter SHYLOCK and LAUNCELOT
I have them ready.
Must yield to such inevitable shame
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself:
daughter's flight.
A friend.
To furnish us.
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
I humbly do desire your grace of pardon:
Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud:
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further:
These griefs and losses have so bated me,
Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman:
No master, sir, but a poor man's son: his father,
Ready, so please your grace.
I view the fight than thou that makest the fray.
Slander her love, and he forgave it her.
fourscore ducats!
For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.
Promise me life, and I'll confess the truth.
SCENE VI. The same.
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.
And where thou now exact'st the penalty,
A pound of man's flesh taken from a man
To try my fortune. By this scimitar
Your mind is tossing on the ocean,
Is dearly bought, 'tis mine and I will have it.
You grow exceeding strange: must it be so?
For, in my mind, you are much bound to him.
Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
My mistress will before the break of day
The best-condition'd and unwearied spirit
Upon advantage.
Of wondrous virtues: sometimes from her eyes
Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
Enter Musicians
But just a pound of flesh: if thou cut'st more
Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty,
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
To ANTONIO
To signify the approaching of his lord,
Before they think of us.
'Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.'
The husbandry and manage of my house
Than you expect: unseal this letter soon,
No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay,
Enter PORTIA and NERISSA
A losing suit against him. Are you answer'd?
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
How many be commanded that command!
I'll die for't but some woman had the ring.
Do you not know me, father?
In underprizing it, so far this shadow
Cornets, and exeunt
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
Her name is Margery, indeed: I'll be sworn, if thou
ere morning.
your messenger came, in loving visitation was with
Ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but
Exit above
I never heard a passion so confused,
Take what wife you will to bed,
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
An age of poverty, from which lingering penance
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
The flesh?
To raise a present sum: therefore go forth,
Is the fair hand that writ.
So doth the greater glory dim the less:
run away from the Jew, I should be ruled by the
I stand for judgment: answer, shall I have it?
Even at that time I may be married too.
Enter SALARINO and SALANIO
And when she put it on, she made me vow
Most rightful judge!
in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.
Wrest once the law to your authority:
I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it,
Exeunt
'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.
Exceed account, but the full sum of me
Ay, so he says.
Faster than gnats in cobwebs, but her eyes,--
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.
wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
That indirectly and directly too
SCENE III. The same. A room in SHYLOCK'S house.
As o'er a brook, to see fair Portia.
will run as far as God has any ground. O rare
How much low peasantry would then be glean'd
And draw her home with music.
I'll break a custom. Is he yet possess'd
'Confess' and 'love'
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew!
Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood
in company of the Marquis of Montferrat?
It will go hard with poor Antonio.
That all the eanlings which were streak'd and pied
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
will better the instruction.
For saying nothing, when, I am very sure,
description, level at my affection.
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
Yes, here I tender it for him in the court,
How much ye would?
A gentle scroll. Fair lady, by your leave,
But mercy is above this sceptred sway,
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.
I'll watch as long for you then. Approach,
To entrap the wisest. Therefore, thou gaudy gold,
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
An 'twere to me, I should be mad at it.
Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer:
Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
lords: they have acquainted me with their
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this
Soft!
For Gratiano never lets me speak.
this, it shall seem to signify.
In such a night
many books together: he is furnished with my
says 'Launcelot, budge not.' 'Budge,' says the
Exit Launcelot
SCENE II: Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house.
But, in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
I shot his fellow of the self-same flight
He attendeth here hard by,
Of greatest port, have all persuaded with him,
Give me your gloves, I'll wear them for your sake,
other ventures he hath, squandered abroad. But ships
An evil soul producing holy witness
come, I'll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling of an eye.
Than to live still and write mine epitaph.
His ring I do accept most thankfully:
With bated breath and whispering humbleness, Say this,
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee:
In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt,
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.
And you embrace the occasion to depart.
I hate him for he is a Christian,
You know, none so well, none so well as you, of my
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en
Which is as dear to me as life itself,
First, there is the Neapolitan prince.
Upon the rack, Bassanio! then confess
Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you
SCENE I. Belmont. Avenue to PORTIA'S house.
In doing courtesies, and one in whom
Nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth
The French and English, there miscarried
So are those crisped snaky golden locks
He shall have merely justice and his bond.
The ancient Roman honour more appears
Be season'd with such viands? You will answer
I once did lend my body for his wealth,
The fool hath planted in his memory
Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death,
O sinful thought! Never so rich a gem
Would make me sad.
Nay more, while grace is saying, hood mine eyes
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
And so, though yours, not yours. Prove it so,
You know me well, and herein spend but time
For thy three thousand ducats here is six.
And, in a word, but even now worth this,
All that glitters is not gold,
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
The paper as the body of my friend,
Do we so.
Nerissa there her clerk: Lorenzo here
And bid him keep it better than the other.
I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me,
Shall I bend low and in a bondman's key,
To wish it back on you: fare you well Jessica.
Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
SCENE IX. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house.
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee,
fiend. 'Budge not,' says my conscience.
To wag their high tops and to make no noise,
If he should offer to choose, and choose the right
Nothing is good, I see, without respect:
Go, gentlemen,
To have the due and forfeit of my bond:
Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll,
To offend, and judge, are distinct offices
We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.
This is kind I offer.
I never did repent for doing good,
You that choose not by the view,
But were the day come, I should wish it dark,
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
SCENE I. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house.
estimation, for I never knew so young a body with so
And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
You, that did void your rheum upon my beard
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
And I, delivering you, am satisfied
but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel
That ever holds: who riseth from a feast
Exeunt
of a saint and the complexion of a devil, I had
himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil
than I have of my face when I last saw him.
It doth appear you are a worthy judge,
Love-news, in faith.
The skilful shepherd peel'd me certain wands,
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
From Tripolis, from Mexico and England,
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?
What harm a wind too great at sea might do.
let not my letter.
Enter LORENZO
No, not take interest, not, as you would say,
Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.
For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.
Ay, his breast:
Well, we shall see your bearing.
And well said too, for who shall go about
And, for my love, I pray you wrong me not.
Are richly come to harbour suddenly:
Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house and
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
thing, Nerissa, ere I'll be married to a sponge.
I will anon: first, let us go to dinner.
And with affection wondrous sensible
I could not for my heart deny it him.
Is your name Shylock?
SCENE III. Venice. A street.
see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use your
Gave it a judge's clerk! no, God's my judge,
Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
I would she were in heaven, so she could
I am sure the duke
That he did pace them first? All things that are,
you can the getting up of the negro's belly: the
Enter a Servant
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.
Come, the full stop.
Which I denying, they fell sick and died,
There you shall find three of your argosies
I am debating of my present store,
As seek to soften that--than which what's harder?--
To be ashamed to be my father's child!
his flesh: what's that good for?
My best endeavours shall be done herein.
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
My people do already know my mind,
Aside
And there is such confusion in my powers,
And see my wealthy Andrew dock'd in sand,
You taught me first to beg, and now methinks
Most heartily I do beseech the court
I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
Marry, God forbid! the boy was the very staff of my
For me three thousand ducats.
Lorenzo, and thy love.
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
Hearing applause and universal shout,
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
That you to-day promised to tell me of?
Shylock, although I neither lend nor borrow
Put bars between the owners and their rights!
Unto the king be by, and then his state
What gold and jewels she is furnish'd with,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strand,
gold again: fourscore ducats at a sitting!
make shift to go without him.
ACT IV
That is done, sir, they have all stomachs.
Than twenty times the value of the sum
the same abundance as your good fortunes are: and
As after some oration fairly spoke
When it is paid, bring your true friend along.
For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.
I pray thee, hear me speak.
Parts that become thee happily enough
You should in all sense be much bound to him.
In Belmont is a lady richly left,
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings!
Enter LAUNCELOT
For my affection.
Make no more offers, use no farther means,
Launcelot, father, for the young gentleman,
boy, will be worth a Jewess' eye.
are scarce cater-cousins--
With gazing fed, and fancy dies
thy praise.
I am not bound to please thee with my answers.
Was set in worse than gold. They have in England
determinations, which is, indeed, to return to their
I'll rather dwell in my necessity.
I do.
There do I give to you and Jessica,
With some delight or other.
Myself and what is mine to you and yours
By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of
Unto the tranect, to the common ferry
Well, while I live I'll fear no other thing
Do you not remember, lady, in your father's time, a
dimensions, senses, affections, passions? fed with
And from your love I have a warranty
O, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly
To-morrow to my bloody creditor.
Art thou contented, Jew? what dost thou say?
But little: I am arm'd and well prepared.
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?
Empties itself, as doth an inland brook
Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil,
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.
shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money.
You may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper
Spits in the face of heaven, is no bar
I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wreck.
Pawn'd with the other, for the poor rude world
Marry, well remember'd.
The duke cannot deny the course of law:
I am bid forth to supper, Jessica:
You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
Pray you, sir, stand up: I am sure you are not
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
prayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
I had it of him: pardon me, Bassanio,
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
Leave hollaing, man: here.
Enter the DUKE, the Magnificoes, ANTONIO, BASSANIO, GRATIANO, SALERIO, and others
My best-esteem'd acquaintance: hie thee, go.
If this will not suffice, it must appear
What if my house be troubled with a rat
Enter PORTIA and NERISSA
The very tyranny and rage of his.
This is the man, this is Antonio,
An if your wife be not a mad-woman,
[Aside]  How all the other passions fleet to air,
Enter STEPHANO
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part:
SCENE V. The same. Before SHYLOCK'S house.
it will feed my revenge. He hath disgraced me, and
A cur can lend three thousand ducats?' Or
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
Who comes with her?
The shadow'd livery of the burnish'd sun,
He wrung Bassanio's hand, and so they parted.
This ring, good sir, alas, it is a trifle!
But get thee gone: I shall be there before thee.
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times
the mart, let him look to his bond: he was wont to
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
If it please you to dine with us.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
The one of them contains my picture, prince:
Now, by my hood, a Gentile and no Jew.
But here an angel in a golden bed
You may as well do anything most hard,
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks,
To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia:
know your answer?
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast:
As there is no firm reason to be render'd,
To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not bleed?
talk of his horse, and he makes it a great
Launcelot Gobbo, do not run, scorn running with thy
and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodging.
Shylock, do you hear?
Why, there, there, there, there! a diamond gone,
By the bad voice.
For do but note a wild and wanton herd,
Some men there are love not a gaping pig,
Till I again see mine.
Enter ANTONIO
A prating boy, that begg'd it as a fee:
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him,
Lorenzo, certain, and my love indeed,
indeed more than I took her for.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.
Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that:
Nor to one place, nor is my whole estate
Is it so nominated in the bond?
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.
for if the devil be within and that temptation
I think he only loves the world for him.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blest:
Indeed, the short and the long is, I serve the Jew,
Such have but a shadow's bliss:
youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the
I will bethink me. May I speak with Antonio?
For wooing here until I sweat again,
with you, drink with you, nor pray with you. What
To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
They in themselves, good-sooth, are too too light.
How many things by season season'd are
By the time I linger here
How true a gentleman you send relief,
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth,
The old proverb is very well parted between my
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house:
That holds this present question in the court?
So likely an ambassador of love:
walk with you, and so following, but I will not eat
'Tween man and man: but thou, thou meagre lead,
Because what follows is pure innocence.
Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
To alter me: I stay here on my bond.
That I have much ado to know myself.
To live in prayer and contemplation,
And will acknowledge you and Jessica
The moon shines bright: in such a night as this,
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind
Why, then to thee, thou silver treasure-house,
[Aside]  O heavens, this is my true-begotten father!
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
We should hold day with the Antipodes,
To shoot another arrow that self way
man: and then to 'scape drowning thrice, and to be
By your leave, sir.
I pray thee, over-name them, and as thou namest
And of opposed natures.
To cozen fortune and be honourable
company to Venice, that swear he cannot choose but break.
Launcelot,' or 'good Gobbo,' or good Launcelot
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.
soul, alive or dead?
not what's spent in the search: why, thou loss upon
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
And now methinks I have a mind to it.
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Thus hath the candle singed the moth.
And the vile squealing of the wry-neck'd fife,
What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica:
Exeunt
I have a suit to you.
Your husband is at hand, I hear his trumpet:
Christian.
the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? I pray
This is Signior Antonio.
in plain terms, gone to heaven.
At the park gate, and therefore haste away,
Let us all ring fancy's knell
You must take your chance,
Exit
news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here?
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
meat, sir, it shall be covered, for your coming in
She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats.'
What, no more?
throstle sing, he falls straight a capering: he will
ACT III
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
As any comer I have look'd on yet
And so did mine too, as the matter falls,
plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match
A kinder gentleman treads not the earth.
And sleep and snore, and rend apparel out,--
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses,
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.
To stay you from election.
hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses,
He came too late, the ship was under sail:
But love is blind and lovers cannot see
And sigh'd his soul toward the Grecian tents,
A friend! what friend? your name, I pray you, friend?
I know he will be glad of our success,
And quicken his embraced heaviness
Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
prodigal, who dare scarce show his head on the
SCENE VIII. Venice. A street.
And the offender's life lies in the mercy
I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys.
Sweet Portia, welcome.
Mark you but that!
us, do we not die? and if you wrong us, shall we not
Enter LORENZO and JESSICA
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
o'er a cold decree: such a hare is madness the
Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me:
Lean, rent and beggar'd by the strumpet wind!
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is,
Will furnish me. But soft! how many months
We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.
Fall parti-colour'd lambs, and those were Jacob's.
a prop? Do you know me, father?
No, that were pity:
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
And that no lawful means can carry me
No more, I pray thee: I am half afeard
So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady,
To ANTONIO
There are a sort of men whose visages
Shall I not have barely my principal?
Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond
most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk: when
That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
I'll pay it presently with all my heart.
Than my faint means would grant continuance:
Let music sound while he doth make his choice,
He would not take it. Never did I know
Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.
their leave: and there is a forerunner come from a
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come,
We shall have old swearing
That he did owe him: and I know, my lord,
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
Let them be free, marry them to your heirs?
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
Which when you part from, lose, or give away,
Until her husband and my lord's return:
And his affections dark as Erebus:
You have obtain'd it.
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
To cry, good joy: good joy, my lord and lady!
No, not my body nor my husband's bed:
Well, do you so, let not me take him, then,
pack: 'Via!' says the fiend, 'away!' says the
There are some shrewd contents in yon same paper,
I will become as liberal as you,
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.
So strange, outrageous, and so variable,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.
I have heard
Veiling an Indian beauty, in a word,
This bond expires, I do expect return
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
Gifts of rich value. Yet I have not seen
I love thee, and it is my love that speaks--
Look to my house. I am right loath to go:
are so reasonable, for there is not one among them
The throned monarch better than his crown,
Now, Balthasar,
Bassanio presently will go aboard:
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
That shall be rack'd, even to the uttermost,
We'll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.
fiend, 'for the heavens, rouse up a brave mind,'
To wish myself much better, yet, for you
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
I did, my lord.
What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?
For I did dream of money-bags to-night.
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.
find the thief, and no satisfaction, no revenge:
I pray you, know me when we meet again:
I did, my lord,
And yet no matter: why should we go in?
Disguise us at my lodging and return,
How shall I know if I do choose the right?
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Therefore no more of it: hear other things.
He is well paid that is well satisfied,
the Goodwins, I think they call the place, a very
these letters delivered, put the liveries to making,
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
Or shall I think in silver she's immured,
shoe him himself. I am much afeard my lady his
shoulders, no sighs but of my breathing, no tears
After his death, of all he dies possess'd of.
is no mean happiness therefore, to be seated in the
Besides, the lottery of my destiny
The pound of flesh, which I demand of him,
The villain Jew with outcries raised the duke,
In the end of autumn turned to the rams,
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
I gave my love a ring and made him swear
he! why, he hath a horse better than the
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head?
Within the house, your mistress is at hand,
And use thou all the endeavour of a man
Of Launcelot, an't please your mastership.
How far that little candle throws his beams!
Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him.
Nerissa, cheer yon stranger, bid her welcome.
Exeunt
I oft found both: I urge this childhood proof,
My mind was never yet more mercenary.
Why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force
to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humours and
Enter SHYLOCK
For the commodity that strangers have
To buy his favour, I extend this friendship:
And be a day before our husbands home:
As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
you may be won by some other sort than your father's
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
Enter SHYLOCK
No, pray thee, let it serve for table-talk,
Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.
You take my house when you do take the prop
Moor is with child by you, Launcelot.
I think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round
gone both ways.
The second, silver, which this promise carries,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight.
What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour?
But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon
To seal love's bonds new-made, than they are wont
If you be well pleased with this
Cannot contain their urine: for affection,
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
The which my love and some necessity
So, thrice fair lady, stand I, even so,
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.
The Jew shall have all justice, soft! no haste:
than between jet and ivory, more between your bloods
her coffin! No news of them? Why, so: and I know
I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
How little is the cost I have bestow'd
To be new-varnish'd! Well, but to my choice:
Thou almost makest me waver in my faith
But I go away with two.
What's here? the portrait of a blinking idiot,
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets:
Sweet, adieu. I'll keep my oath,
When Jacob grazed his uncle Laban's sheep--
In such a night
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
I would detain you here some month or two
'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
Do you desire?
Cold, indeed, and labour lost:
But, being seasoned with a gracious voice,
[Aside]  Why, I were best to cut my left hand off
I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er,
Take some remembrance of us, as a tribute,
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?
Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee, set a
gives rare new liveries: if I serve not him, I
Will never more break faith advisedly.
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith
I owe you much, and, like a wilful youth,
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that.
Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way
Until my lord's return: for mine own part,
fall into Charybdis, your mother: well, you are
To leave a rich Jew's service, to become
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,
But if my father had not scanted me
Unless she do it under this excuse,
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad,
I will make fast the doors, and gild myself
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
Which is the better man, the greater throw
knows me not: I will try confusions with him.
I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool,
And, whilst thou lay'st in thy unhallow'd dam,
O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!
Music, whilst BASSANIO comments on the caskets to himself
Even such a husband
a ship of rich lading wrecked on the narrow seas,
That cannot be:
'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire,'
Let's see once more this saying graved in gold
'Tis nine o'clock: our friends all stay for you.
Let me give light, but let me not be light,
the Count Palatine, he is every man in no man, if a
And there's an oath of credit.
My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
And if it stand, as you yourself still do,
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps
Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal: it was my
To show how costly summer was at hand,
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.
will not have me, choose:' he hears merry tales and
What, is Antonio here?
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.
What page's suit she hath in readiness.
The motions of his spirit are dull as night
pagan, most sweet Jew! if a Christian did not play
SONG.
But there is come a messenger before,
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.
You shall not seal to such a bond for me:
On me, my bargains and my well-won thrift,
Farewell: I'll grow a talker for this gear.
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
Get thee gone, but do it.
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Come, go with me, peruse this as thou goest:
To offices of tender courtesy.
Alack, sir, I am sand-blind, I know you not.
Rialto, a beggar, that was used to come so smug upon
Must give: for what? for lead? hazard for lead?
I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.
From the four corners of the earth they come,
Stolen by my daughter! Justice! find the girl,
are but boards, sailors but men: there be land-rats
As to offend, himself being offended,
Yes, yes, it was Bassanio, as I think, he was so called.
Not to deny this imposition,
Oh, no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a
Making them lightest that wear most of it:
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see,
He seeks my life, his reason well I know:
Exeunt
And sweating until my very roof was dry
You should have been respective and have kept it.
The other, that he do record a gift,
Sola! where? where?
That I should questionless be fortunate!
With one fool's head I came to woo,
Sir, grieve not you, you are welcome notwithstanding.
If she were by, to hear you make the offer.
Nor I in yours
I thank God, I thank God. Is't true, is't true?
Let all of his complexion choose me so.
Even in the force and road of casualty.
That souls of animals infuse themselves
'Tis good we do so.
bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine
Become the touches of sweet harmony.
Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.
Seem they in motion? Here are sever'd lips,
Very vilely in the morning, when he is sober, and
A young and learned doctor to our court.
So please my lord the duke and all the court
Your worship's friend and Launcelot, sir.
Your hand, Salerio: what's the news from Venice?
By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio--
Let fortune go to hell for it, not I.
And saw the lion's shadow ere himself
him a present! give him a halter: I am famished in
cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to
Indies, I understand moreover, upon the Rialto, he
Gaoler, look to him: tell not me of mercy,
Shylock is my name.
As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
There are my keys. But wherefore should I go?
His rigorous course, but since he stands obdurate
Three thousand ducats for three months and Antonio bound.
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
And we will answer all things faithfully.
Exeunt
Take thrice thy money, bid me tear the bond.
O hell! what have we here?
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it:
They would be better, if well followed.
And weigh thy value with an even hand:
See me in talk with thee.
And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour,
'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'
The prodigal Christian. Jessica, my girl,
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers
The attribute to awe and majesty,
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!
Enter PORTIA, dressed like a doctor of laws
Not so, sir, neither, I know my duty.
And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
Why, Jessica!
I have possess'd your grace of what I purpose,
Launcelot, my boy.
She would not hold out enemy for ever,
And, for your love, I'll take this ring from you:
Exit
At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence.
that he hath devised in these three chests of gold,
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
For here I read for certain that my ships
therefore be of good cheer, for truly I think you
But tell not me, I know, Antonio
window, for all this, There will come a Christian
I will have nothing else but only this,
An it shall please you to break up
O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it:
When every goose is cackling, would be thought
That is the voice,
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
For I am much ashamed of my exchange:
And that it should lie with you in your grave:
Aside
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.
A gentle riddance. Draw the curtains, go.
Was this inserted to make interest good?
Will bless it and approve it with a text,
The self-same way with more advised watch,
O, these deliberate fools! when they do choose,
Would blow me to an ague, when I thought
Your grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify
price of hogs: if we grow all to be pork-eaters, we
I must away this night toward Padua,
I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of
hope, an old man, shall frutify unto you--
[Reads]
The several caskets to this noble prince.
The third possessor, ay, he was the third--
The thoughts of others! Pray you, tell me this,
Signior Bassanio, hear me:
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind,
I would have stay'd till I had made you merry,
Italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
By God's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit. Can
This night methinks is but the daylight sick,
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
chooses you, will, no doubt, never be chosen by any
Launcelot, the Jew's man, and I am sure Margery your
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing:
And, when the work of generation was
Go to, then, you come to me, and you say
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
Stamped in gold, but that's insculp'd upon,
Return in haste, for I do feast to-night
That lately stole his daughter:
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
Your answer to that.
Enter BASSANIO, PORTIA, GRATIANO, NERISSA, and Attendants
revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will
When I was with him I have heard him swear
Will show you his estate.
Or, as it were, the pageants of the sea,
Sir, you are very welcome to our house:
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
them, I will describe them, and, according to my
A messenger with letters from the doctor,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as
Tell him there's a post come from my master, with
For princes to come view fair Portia:
Go with me to a notary, seal me there
according to Fates and Destinies and such odd
To have it of my trust or for my sake.
Three thousand ducats, due unto the Jew,
Gaoler, look to him.
Not I, but my affairs, have made you wait:
Down therefore and beg mercy of the duke.
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
When it is paid according to the tenor.
What says the golden chest? ha! let me see:
On what compulsion must I? tell me that.
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me
miscarried, my creditors grow cruel, my estate is
Ergo, Master Launcelot. Talk not of Master
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
I'll have no speaking: I will have my bond.
Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer:
I say, my daughter is my flesh and blood.
'Shylock, we would have moneys:' you say so,
That he hath a neighbourly charity in him, for he
There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
He unlocks the golden casket
To make me blest or cursed'st among men.
By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed
Upon the wild sea banks and waft her love
Within these two months, that's a month before
SCENE I. Venice. A street.
In lieu of this last night did lie with me.
And let us make incision for your love,
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.
To bait fish withal: if it will feed nothing else,
That's certain: I, for my part, knew the tailor
I know you would be prouder of the work
And all for use of that which is mine own.
How much I have disabled mine estate,
And hold your fortune for your bliss,
another. This making Christians will raise the
There, where your argosies with portly sail,
death have good inspirations: therefore the lottery,
But she may learn, happier than this,
It wearies me, you say it wearies you,
Exact the penalty.
There be fools alive, I wis,
you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter:
If you choose that wherein I am contain'd,
sayings, the Sisters Three and such branches of
Enter PORTIA, NERISSA, LORENZO, JESSICA, and BALTHASAR
My wind cooling my broth
up my rest to run away, so I will not rest till I
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
You must prepare your bosom for his knife.
And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats
A creature, that did bear the shape of man,
Upon the fortune of this present year:
to keep his name company!--
what is his humility? Revenge. If a Christian
for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on
To be the dowry of a second head,
Away! make haste: thou knowist where I will tarry.
[Aside to NERISSA]  Thou mayst, I warrant.
To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.
Talk you of young Master Launcelot?
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief:
And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
Call you? what is your will?
Not one, my lord.
So may the outward shows be least themselves:
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear,
mother: thus when I shun Scylla, your father, I
done me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being, I
'Twere good you do so much for charity.
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion,
I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon
He will, an if he live to be a man.
My lord and lady, it is now our time,
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight:
Nor thrust your head into the public street
We two will leave you: but at dinner-time,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.
Have power to bid you welcome. By your leave,
Lies all within. Deliver me the key:
O learned judge! Mark, Jew: a learned judge!
greatness whereof I cannot enough commend, comes
As I have ever found thee honest-true,
There's something tells me, but it is not love,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
he out of Venice, I can make what merchandise I
Since nought so stockish, hard and full of rage,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
Are with more spirit chased than enjoy'd.
That purpose merriment. But fare you well:
I will survey the inscriptions back again.
Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo: Launcelot and I
It should seem, then, that Dobbin's tail grows
Why, then the devil give him good of it!
me an officer, bespeak him a fortnight before. I
By a beloved prince, there doth appear
of my father's will. I am glad this parcel of wooers
We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
Is that any thing now?
Exeunt
What sum owes he the Jew?
There, take it, prince, and if my form lie there,
Talk with respect and swear but now and then,
Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
Go in, Nerissa,
that was, your son that is, your child that shall
And even there, his eye being big with tears,
To the last hour of act, and then 'tis thought
Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.
Why should a man, whose blood is warm within,
fiend, who, saving your reverence, is the devil
But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.
Presenting a letter
I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this:
To a new-crowned monarch: such it is
That they did give the rings away to men,
I am not bid for love, they flatter me:
To woo a maid in way of marriage: Lastly,
O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Do you confess the bond?
Enter LAUNCELOT, with a letter
the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject
First, forward to the temple: after dinner
And when I ope my lips let no dog bark!'
That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
By the sweet power of music: therefore the poet
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?
Can alter a decree established:
He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve--
age, my very prop.
Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed
be Launcelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood.
swore he would pay him again when he was able: I
And earthly power doth then show likest God's
young Master Launcelot.
With bleared visages, come forth to view
dislike, so is the will of a living daughter curbed
Gratiano and Lorenzo. Fare ye well:
My lodging out. Give him a livery
No, we shall ne'er win at that sport, and stake down.
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey,
Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate
Nor well, unless in mind: his letter there
Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.
The best-regarded virgins of our clime
hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and
How every fool can play upon the word! I think the
I thank your honour. For my part, my lord,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
Why, yet it lives there uncheck'd that Antonio hath
Flourish of cornets. Enter PORTIA, with the PRINCE OF MOROCCO, and their trains
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
To come again to Carthage.
You look not well, Signior Antonio,
SCENE I. Venice. A court of justice.
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
You know the law, your exposition
Where is your master?
be ready at the farthest by five of the clock. See
And I am prest unto it: therefore, speak.
A golden mesh to entrap the hearts of men,
So do I, my lord:
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
Plucking the grass, to know where sits the wind,
Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? say, when?
If worthier friends had not prevented me.
Your company at dinner.
If you would walk in absence of the sun.
Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.
are to be laid upon the children: therefore, I
'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves,'
Three thousand ducats, well.
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
This were kindness.
I pray you, tarry: pause a day or two
upon a book, I shall have good fortune. Go to,
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?
I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend.
When I did first impart my love to you,
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
And lose my hopes.
None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
take heed, honest Gobbo, or, as aforesaid, 'honest
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes:
Exeunt SALARINO and SALANIO
That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.
O noble judge! O excellent young man!
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirits,
Hath not her fellow.
But none can drive him from the envious plea
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
wife is my mother.
Exeunt
To hold opinion with Pythagoras,
Exeunt SALANIO, SALARINO, and Servant
twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain may
I feel too much thy blessing: make it less,
Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF MOROCCO  and his train, PORTIA, NERISSA, and others attending
No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk,
adieu: these foolish drops do something drown my
Now make your choice.
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.
if you tickle us, do we not laugh? if you poison
As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embraced despair,
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof.
Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare!
warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer, as
God bless your worship!
Fie, fie, Gratiano! where are all the rest?
Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.
Which rather threatenest than dost promise aught,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
I owe the most, in money and in love,
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
Ere I ope his letter,
I'll stay no longer question.
That is the very defect of the matter, sir.
Past all expressing. It is very meet
Friend Launcelot, what's the news?
were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear!
To my heart's hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
That by direct or indirect attempts
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.
Turn you where your lady is
Peering in maps for ports and piers and roads,
Yes, other men have ill luck too: Antonio, as I
Being the bosom lover of my lord,
Be valued against your wife's commandment.
Of starved people.
Do as I bid you, shut doors after you:
Of such misery doth she cut me off.
Signior Bassanio!
hope neither.
O, that estates, degrees and offices
precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter
I pray you, give me leave to go from hence,
And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine,
Well, well: but, for mine own part, as I have set
If that the youth of my new interest here
For, by these blessed candles of the night,
The world is still deceived with ornament.
Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
A young Venetian, one that comes before
conceits shall govern.
upon one wooer, another knocks at the door.
Or any air of music touch their ears,
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood,
One speak for both. What would you?
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
What treason there is mingled with your love.
Have loved it too: I would not change this hue,
Exeunt GRATIANO and LORENZO
Enter JESSICA and LAUNCELOT
In the cradle where it lies.
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend,
And leave itself unfurnish'd. Yet look, how far
Will you cover then, sir?
And suffer'd him to go displeased away,
Sola, sola! wo ha, ho! sola, sola!
Enter JESSICA, above, in boy's clothes
My lord, here stays without
Are yours, my lord: I give them with this ring,
Only for this, I pray you, pardon me.
That took some pains in writing, he begg'd mine,
The Hebrew will turn Christian: he grows kind.
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
And begg'd the ring, the which I did deny him
Thou hast contrived against the very life
'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.'
Well, gaoler, on. Pray God, Bassanio come
I will not choose what many men desire,
Sweet Portia,
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer!
In reason he should never come to heaven
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven,
Are not with me esteem'd above thy life:
Exit
And we are stay'd for at Bassanio's feast.
Yea, twice the sum: if that will not suffice,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell,
Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON, PORTIA, and their trains
look to his bond.
And so farewell, till we shall meet again.
See to my house, left in the fearful guard
But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
Upon his death, unto the gentleman
He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
And whiter than the paper it writ on
Fare you well, your suit is cold.
Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange
As from her lord, her governor, her king.
Is sum of something, which, to term in gross,
Enter a Servant
And I have better news in store for you
Which casket 'twas I chose, next, if I fail
You know I say nothing to him, for he understands
And doth impeach the freedom of the state,
Why then, thus it is:
Exeunt
To come abroad with him at his request.
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
Double six thousand, and then treble that,
Be here at Belmont, she doth stray about
This kindness will I show.
Why, then you are in love.
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig,
fortune! here comes the man: to him, father, for I
As much as I deserve! Why, that's the lady:
In christening shalt thou have two god-fathers:
Bassanio, lord Love, if thy will it be!
As much as he deserves! Pause there, Morocco,
[To NERISSA]  By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong,
Where is he?
Exit Launcelot
Of merchant-marring rocks?
You teach me how a beggar should be answer'd.
For, having such a blessing in his lady,
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
Directly interest: mark what Jacob did.
Exit
pleasure: if your love do not persuade you to come,
In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk:
Since this fortune falls to you,
Come on: in this there can be no dismay,
And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was
Which makes me think that this Antonio,
I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels.
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults,
This Jacob from our holy Abram was,
go, good Tubal, at our synagogue, Tubal.
loss! the thief gone with so much, and so much to
They have o'erlook'd me and divided me,
but of my shedding.
Your single bond, and, in a merry sport,
think the Frenchman became his surety and sealed
should marry twenty husbands. If he would despise me
'Hath a dog money? is it possible
talk you of young Master Launcelot?
man's son,' or rather an honest woman's son, for,
indeed, my father did something smack, something
conscience says 'No, take heed,' honest Launcelot,
incarnal, and, in my conscience, my conscience is
To these injunctions every one doth swear
I will go before, sir. Mistress, look out at
I'll have my bond, I will not hear thee speak:
Well, let his father be what a' will, we talk of
Fast bind, fast find,
Is that the law?
Upon your charter and your city's freedom.
A goodly apple rotten at the heart:
Exit Stephano
who, being more than sand-blind, high-gravel blind,
Meantime the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
His words were 'Farewell mistress,' nothing else.
How to choose right, but I am then forsworn,
That this same paper brings you.
here are simple scapes. Well, if Fortune be a
I have it ready for thee, here it is.
with too much as they that starve with nothing. It
Hath not the ring upon it, it is gone.
Give order to my servants that they take
conscience, I should stay with the Jew my master,
Never to part with it, and here he stands,
But with all brief and plain conveniency
What damned error, but some sober brow
Sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming.
Why, shall we turn to men?
Ran in my veins, I was a gentleman,
Exit
Exeunt
There is no power in the tongue of man
How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon?
Yourself, renowned prince, then stood as fair
God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man.
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
Than if you had made waste of all I have:
To kiss this shrine, this mortal-breathing saint:
choose me a husband. O me, the word 'choose!' I may
A halter gratis, nothing else, for God's sake.
And let the Christian go.
Will much impeach the justice of his state,
Give me your hand, Bassanio: fare you well!
Black-Monday last at six o'clock i' the morning,
Here: what would my lord?
[Aside]  How like a fawning publican he looks!
Then I am yours.
His Jewish heart: therefore, I do beseech you,
Who then conceiving did in eaning time
There is no vice so simple but assumes
I pray you, is my master yet return'd?
My patience to his fury, and am arm'd
Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio,
Unto Antonio's house: away! make haste.
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?
Because I will not jump with common spirits
and, God be thanked, well to live.
A coin that bears the figure of an angel
With oaths of love, at last, if promise last,
By the fool multitude, that choose by show,
But music for the time doth change his nature.
'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.'
To eke it and to draw it out in length,
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince:
In summer, where the ways are fair enough:
Believe me, no: I thank my fortune for it,
What says the silver with her virgin hue?
Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
That will I do.
He lends out money gratis and brings down
In truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker: but,
To signify their coming.
Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost!
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.
Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but,
Every offence is not a hate at first.
To their right praise and true perfection!
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
Your grace shall understand that at the receipt of
heart as I can bid the other four farewell, I should
Which makes me fear the enjoying of my love:
To take a tedious leave: thus losers part.
How I shall take her from her father's house,
twenty what were good to be done, than be one of the
Enter LAUNCELOT
be glad of his approach: if he have the condition
may, but at the length truth will out.
take his bond.
'Conscience,' say I, 'you counsel well,' ' Fiend,'
From stubborn Turks and Tartars, never train'd
Their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze
The pardon that I late pronounced here.
Now, by mine honour, which is yet mine own,
Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio
Not as a fee: grant me two things, I pray you,
I'll have my bond, speak not against my bond:
Madam, with all my heart,
Truly then I fear you are damned both by father and
Adieu! tears exhibit my tongue. Most beautiful
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?
I am to learn,
Gramercy! wouldst thou aught with me?
says the fiend, 'and run.' Well, my conscience,
In such a night
If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
Enter ANTONIO, SALARINO, and SALANIO
Well, I'll set you forth.
Before you hazard, for, in choosing wrong,
at the next turning of all, on your left, marry, at
mean pirates, and then there is the peril of waters,
without, I know he will choose it. I will do any
That I were couching with the doctor's clerk.
No note at all of our being absent hence,
manly spirit: adieu.
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,
Why, look you, how you storm!
And what of him? did he take interest?
But we will visit you at supper-time.
You may as well use question with the wolf
Antonio, I am married to a wife
This is the pent-house under which Lorenzo
I'll tell my husband, Launcelot, what you say: here he comes.
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
Enter JESSICA, below
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach,
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
And I have reason for it. Signior Antonio
And what hope is that, I pray thee?
No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness
By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays
winds and rocks. The man is, notwithstanding,
And wish for all that, that I had not killed them,
Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy,
Had been the very sum of my confession:
His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
But note me, signior.
How you do leave me to mine own protection.
But Antonio is certainly undone.
Lie all unlock'd to your occasions.
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.
A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross,
Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way
You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog,
And, Launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see
And when your honours mean to solemnize
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not!
Often have you heard that told:
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Enter BASSANIO, ANTONIO, GRATIANO, and their followers
What should I say to you? Should I not say
falling out that year on Ash-Wednesday was four
Content, i' faith: I'll seal to such a bond
I would outstare the sternest eyes that look,
Which, like your asses and your dogs and mules,
I cannot think you are my son.
It is your music, madam, of the house.
Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
wept for the death of a third husband. But it is
First go with me to church and call me wife,
Marry, sir, to bid my old master the
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you,
says, you are no good member of the commonwealth,
commendation.
The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
And every word in it a gaping wound,
The duke himself, and the magnificoes
In terms of choice I am not solely led
So will I never be: so may you miss me,
Unto the judge that begg'd it and indeed
With leave, Bassanio: I am half yourself,
Mark me now, now will I raise the waters. Talk you
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails,
Here to this devil, to deliver you.
The law allows it, and the court awards it.
smiles not: I fear he will prove the weeping
Reads
Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.
Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear,
To hold a rival place with one of them,
But I will go. Go you before me, sirrah,
The ancient saying is no heresy,
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day:
are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do
Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.
price of pork.
tempts me saying to me 'Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, good
The reason is, your spirits are attentive:
That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
I will not fail her, speak it privately.
What, Jessica!--thou shalt not gormandise,
Nay, but hear me:
a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my gossip
For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you!
Go draw aside the curtains and discover
The issue of the exploit. Go, Hercules!
Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools.
Thou stickest a dagger in me: I shall never see my
Will rush into the state: it cannot be.
Perhaps I will return immediately:
We leave you now with better company.
Had been her husband rather than a Christian!
And many an error by the same example
You shall look fairer, ere I give or hazard.
Here is the money.
If you repay me not on such a day,
It is much that the Moor should be more than reason:
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.
unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had rather be
Opening the leaden casket
And do a wilful stillness entertain,
That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you,
For we must measure twenty miles to-day.
To come with him along.
yet, for aught I see, they are as sick that surfeit
When the moon shone, we did not see the candle.
cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfort! The curse
For you shall hence upon your wedding-day:
His hour is almost past.
sufficient. Three thousand ducats, I think I may
It is almost morning,
Here is a letter, read it at your leisure,
Thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice,
To bring thee to the gallows, not the font.
And would conceive for what I gave the ring
All in an hour.
Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind
Than customary bounty can enforce you.
My own flesh and blood to rebel!
neither choose whom I would nor refuse whom I
If you did know for whom I gave the ring
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?
Nay, that's true, that's very true. Go, Tubal, fee
Reply, reply.
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
Enter'd my house. Antonio, you are welcome,
Here dwells my father Jew. Ho! who's within?
A many fools, that stand in better place,
And other of such vinegar aspect
I will not fail you.
Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
May not extend so far as to the lady:
Or your own honour to contain the ring,
And mine a sad one.
To the sea-monster: I stand for sacrifice
And better in my mind not undertook.
My Lord Bassanio upon more advice
Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart:
Meetest for death: the weakest kind of fruit
Then do but say to me what I should do
I pray you, show my youth old Shylock's house.
You may as well go stand upon the beach
There's more depends on this than on the value.
Three thousand ducats: I'll not answer that:
The quality of mercy is not strain'd,
My honour would not let ingratitude
Because you are not merry: and 'twere as easy
home and to trouble you with no more suit, unless
'	Then, howso'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things
But I should think of shallows and of flats,
But my outside to behold:
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.
Hate counsels not in such a quality.
Exit SHYLOCK
Shall they see us?
So be gone: you are sped.
Therefore thou must be hang'd at the state's charge.
Nerissa, that I cannot choose one nor refuse none?
You call'd me dog, and for these courtesies
You shall not know by what strange accident
As who should say 'I am Sir Oracle,
Gilded tombs do worms enfold.
your letter I am very sick: but in the instant that
And I his clerk, therefore be well advised
Govern'd a wolf, who, hang'd for human slaughter,
Give him this letter, do it secretly,
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
So let me find thee still. Take this same letter,
Upon my power I may dismiss this court,
He hath refused it in the open court:
For, as I hear, he was much bound for you.
Issuing life-blood. But is it true, Salerio?
Well, keep me company but two years moe,
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode,
Your answer had not been inscroll'd:
Creep in our ears: soft stillness and the night
So says the bond: doth it not, noble judge?
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may!
Is now converted: but now I was the lord
mean: superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but
Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from
As far as Belmont.
No more pertains to me, my lord, than you.
You need not fear, lady, the having any of these
Try what my credit can in Venice do:
So keen and greedy to confound a man:
ACT I
down indirectly to the Jew's house.
at your command, I will run.
For it appears, by manifest proceeding,
With him is Gratiano gone along,
How now! what news?
Even there where merchants most do congregate,
There may as well be amity and life
Exeunt
And would not be awaked.
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's,
And find it out by proclamation:
But stay the very riping of the time,
Wherein my time something too prodigal
I do never use it.
I like not fair terms and a villain's mind.
I am content.
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
Thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate.
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
That did renew old AEson.
Until confirm'd, sign'd, ratified by you.
And, in the hearing of these many friends,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.
For the intent and purpose of the law
eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.
Upon  a knife, 'Love me, and leave me not.'
teach me, I will execute, and it shall go hard but I
grow to, he had a kind of taste, well, my conscience
He is a proper man's picture, but, alas, who can
It must not be, there is no power in Venice
Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
Exeunt
The fire seven times tried this:
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
I am not well: send the deed after me,
For happy wedlock hours.
And then I told you true: and yet, dear lady,
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
To see me thus transformed to a boy.
Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time:
Where men enforced do speak anything.
I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelot, if
And curb this cruel devil of his will.
But stop my house's ears, I mean my casements:
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones and floods,
Enter GRATIANO and SALARINO, masqued
Over your threshold: moneys is your suit
Methinks it should have power to steal both his
I'll not deny him any thing I have,
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
O sweet Portia,
You have too much respect upon the world:
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica:
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
If I do fail in fortune of my choice,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
be.
They are entirely welcome.
A breed for barren metal of his friend?
When you do take the means whereby I live.
Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
And hath preferr'd thee, if it be preferment
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts:
years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend
Make room, and let him stand before our face.
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crost,
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
And Portia one, there must be something else
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark,
That do converse and waste the time together,
I shall be saved by my husband, he hath made me a
And every object that might make me fear
Be assured you may.
you thus get my wife into corners.
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
'Tis well you offer it behind her back,
He is ready at the door: he comes, my lord.
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it.
To wit, besides commends and courteous breath,
Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?
If thou be'st rated by thy estimation,
And stand indebted, over and above,
I thank your lordship, you have got me one.
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
How honourable ladies sought my love,
Music
me in heaven, because I am a Jew's daughter: and he
And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.
Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or
to master Jew's?
To give the judgment.
It is engender'd in the eyes,
Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank,
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid,
And laugh like parrots at a bag-piper,
To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.
I cannot tell, I make it breed as fast:
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb,
I chanced on this letter.
I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time,
Shylock, there's thrice thy money offer'd thee.
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?
And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of these events at full. Let us go in,
O upright judge! Mark, Jew: O learned judge!
And swear I lost the ring defending it.
Tell her the process of Antonio's end,
widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one
I'll see if I can get my husband's ring,
Many a man his life hath sold
learning, is indeed deceased, or, as you would say
'Twill be recorded for a precedent,
I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
In speed to Padua: see thou render this
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail:
to leave the dam.
Mark you this, Bassanio,
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
Bring us the letter, call the messenger.
You hear the learn'd Bellario, what he writes:
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
In such a night
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
For three months, well.
Besides, Antonio certified the duke
Before a friend of this description
promise ye, I fear you. I was always plain with
'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
Aloud
My purse, my person, my extremest means,
That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
How now, Tubal! what news from Genoa? hast thou
desires to speak with you both.
O, be thou damn'd, inexecrable dog!
Were but a weak disabling of myself.
His borrow'd purse. Well, Jessica, go in,
How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony's nephew?
Into my cousin's hand, Doctor Bellario,
say I, 'you counsel well:' to be ruled by my
I am provided of a torch-bearer.
Forgive a moiety of the principal,
In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
She is damned for it.
A Daniel come to judgment! yea, a Daniel!
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
If you deny it, let the danger light
Yet more quarrelling with occasion! Wilt thou show
Enter SALANIO and SALARINO
It is not so express'd: but what of that?
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
Let it presage the ruin of your love
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all,
will. Go, go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue,
The painter plays the spider and hath woven
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.
Nay, but I bar to-night: you shall not gauge me
Than young Alcides, when he did redeem
It is an attribute to God himself,
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
Parted with sugar breath: so sweet a bar
Vailing her high-top lower than her ribs
Upon supposed fairness, often known
How begot, how nourished?
And let him sign it: we'll away to-night
Be made as soft as yours and let their palates
Still more fool I shall appear
But come at once,
Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
And others, when the bagpipe sings i' the nose,
Go, presently inquire, and so will I,
Which he calls interest. Cursed be my tribe,
In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as
In way of marriage: therefore be advised.
For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry,
Within the eye of honour, be assured,
This casket threatens. Men that hazard all
But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin,
Too long a pause for that which you find there.
'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
SCENE II. Venice. A street.
And so may I, blind fortune leading me,
Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
For who love I so much? And now who knows
devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps
You swore to me, when I did give it you,
And die with grieving.
We trifle time: I pray thee, pursue sentence.
Commend me to your honourable wife:
And even but now return'd, I have not yet
Enter Old GOBBO, with a basket
The words expressly are 'a pound of flesh:'
to master Jew's?
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
I oft deliver'd from his forfeitures
And so all yours. O, these naughty times
Exeunt
master Shylock and you, sir: you have the grace of
We have not made good preparation.
What is here?
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
And hedged me by his wit, to yield myself
And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones,
To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse!
Where money is, and I no question make
If you had pleased to have defended it
Had quite miscarried: I dare be bound again,
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven:
Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea,
I never more will break an oath with thee.
Who, if he break, thou mayst with better face
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.
very low, my bond to the Jew is forfeit, and since
Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed Janus,
request in my stead. I beseech you, let his lack of
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
I pray thee, let us go and find him out
I would not lose you, and you know yourself,
Truly, the more to blame he: we were Christians
I am a tainted wether of the flock,
Than is her custom: it is still her use
Ha! what sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath
Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
Or less than a just pound, be it but so much
Supply your present wants and take no doit
And I must freely have the half of anything
How many then should cover that stand bare!
Enter PORTIA and NERISSA
ransacked, my reputation gnawn at, and I shall not
fee'd every slight occasion that could but niggardly
Enter DOCTOR CAIUS
Brook is his name?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house:
cowl-staff? look, how you drumble! Carry them to
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
to dinner: besides your cheer, you shall have
Bardolph, I say,--
house between ten and eleven.
into the water. Mistress Ford desires you to come suddenly.
a postmaster's boy.
chamber matter of it: if he were twenty Sir John
Sir John, there's one Master Brook below would fain
the best and the fairest, that would have won any
'Seese' and 'putter'! have I lived to stand at the
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about,
send her your page, no remedy.
wrongs you.
And turn him to no pain, but if he start,
That were a jest indeed! they have not so little
There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his
Hard by, at street end, he will be here anon.
peradventures shall tell you another tale, if
Datchet-lane: they took me on their shoulders, met
if I have horns to make one mad, let the proverb go
amazed, call all your senses to you, defend your
Exit
Nay, good master parson, keep in your weapon.
it as any man in England. You are afraid, if you see
My heart misgives me: here comes Master Fenton.
Aside
Ay, by these gloves, did he, or I would I might
for I know Anne's mind as well as another does. Out
been drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and
Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage
He hears with ears.
afore Michaelmas?
O sweet Sir John!
Enter FORD
You Banbury cheese!
coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he hath an
[To PAGE]  And this is true, I like not the humour
I would desires.
white spot about her.
into the Park: we two must go together.
Pulling SIMPLE out
Why, this passes, Master Ford, you are not to go
worship more of the wart the next time we have
out ere he come?
good opportunities for the ork. 'Pless my soul!
Not I, sir, pray you, keep on.
How might we disguise him?
Blessing on your heart for't!
With both the humours, I:
Exit
'Save you, good Sir Hugh!
imaginations of your own heart: this is jealousies.
O, you are a flattering boy: now I see you'll be a courtier.
then she ruminates, then she devises, and what they
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE
indeed, cannot abide 'em, they are very ill-favored
As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
She shall not see me: I will ensconce me behind the arras.
protest, mine never shall. I warrant he hath a
'Tis past eight already, sir.
been Anne Page, would I might never stir!--and 'tis
Pauca verba, Sir John, goot worts.
have brought her into such a canaries as 'tis
ready to crack with impatience. Who says this is
Help to cover your master, boy. Call your men,
By your leave, I cry you mercy: give your worship
Word of denial: froth and scum, thou liest!
My master, sir, Master Slender, sent to her, seeing
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head. Now,
Nay, but do so, then: and, look you, he may come and
honest a 'omans as I will desires among five
does lend articles?
backs, what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a
Exit
quickly: she'll make you amends, I warrant you.
Vere is mine host de Jarteer?
and I pray you all go with me.
I did look upon.
me more wit than ever I learned before in my life,
What's the matter? how now!
So shall I evermore be bound to thee,
What, while you were there?
Pulcher.
reputation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever.
not stay for him to kill him? have I not, at de place
notwithstanding that, I know Anne's mind,--that's
Enter BARDOLPH
But what of this?
And that, my state being gall'd with my expense,
And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
away your child on a fool, and a physician? Look on
By your leave, sir: I am sick till I see her.
in that surge, like a horse-shoe, think of
not have things cool.
little nearer this ways:--I myself dwell with master
that we know one another.
Why, you say well. But I have another messenger to
Windsor leads a better life than she does: do what
is not show his face.
Well, heaven knows how I love you, and you shall one
God's patience and the king's English.
Good Sir John, I sue for yours: not to charge you,
O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, I
A cur, sir.
Trudge, plod away o' the hoof, seek shelter, pack!
In him that was of late an heretic,
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a
And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant,
I hope, upon familiarity will grow more contempt:
above deck.
cuckold. Come to me soon at night.
Believe it, Page, he speaks sense.
ways do lie open.
Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone.
him.
Forsooth, I have forgot.
unpitifully, methought.
Troth, sir, all is in his hands above: but
slighted me into the river with as little remorse as
No, certainly.
Is it not true, Master Page?
of lying. He hath wronged me in some humours: I
worship's a wanton! Well, heaven forgive you and all
the excellency of her honour, that the folly of my
For they must all be mask'd and vizarded,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.
will predominate over the peasant, and thou shalt
host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar, I
Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you,
Have a care of your entertainments: there is a
with the finger of my substance: if he take her,
my trot, dere is no duke dat the court is know to
Ay, be-gar, and de maid is love-a me: my nursh-a
Come, will this wood take fire?
may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you
Finely attired in a robe of white.
indeed: I like not when a 'oman has a great peard,
trempling of mind! I shall be glad if he have
Disarm them, and let them question: let them keep
What is 'lapis,' William?
if you will help to bear it, Sir John, take all, or
Go take up these clothes here quickly. Where's the
and, I think, hath appointed them contrary places,
Fie, fie, Master Ford! are you not ashamed? What
Very ill-favoredly, Master Brook.
you should know my daughter by her garments?
hundred years.
It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is!
I'll go out then.
Why, then the world's mine oyster.
and there is also another device in my prain, which
looking wildly, and would needs speak with you presently.
with a piece of toasted cheese.
gown above.
Like a fair house built on another man's ground, so
politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel? Shall I
Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience, he makes
hath the finest mad devil of jealousy in him,
Faith, but you do, in my mind.
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear.
Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told me
well. Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil
You would have married her most shamefully,
Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student
break their hearts but they will effect. God be
set on thy horns. O powerful love! that, in some
ACT IV
Away, away!
Her father hath commanded her to slip
dagger with a master of fence, three veneys for a
With ribands pendent, flaring 'bout her head,
know how I speed, and the conclusion shall be
any.
Yes, py'r lady, if he has a quarter of your coat,
Dat is good, by gar, with all my heart!
as my word, but speciously for Master Fenton. Well,
yet to be what I would not shall not make me tame:
The superstitious idle-headed eld
It appears so by his weapons. Keep them asunder:
about you, have you?
No, Master Brook, but the peaking Cornuto her
I have spoke, let him follow.
vill cut his ears.
Enter BARDOLPH
Alas, sir, I cannot fence.
Quickly, quickly! is the buck-basket--
Noise within
Counter-gate, which is as hateful to me as the reek
Pray you, do so: she's a very tattling woman.
Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me in
And how long lay you there?
Thames? Well, if I be served such another trick,
good soldiers and tall fellows, and when Mistress
forbid her my house? She comes of errands, does
odd numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death. Away!
What is he?
court, and they are going to meet him.
drop and liquor fishermen's boots with me, I warrant
Of what quality was your love, then?
then another fault in the semblance of a fowl, think
give the dozen white luces in their coat.
I have long loved her, and, I protest to you,
Pulling clothes out of the basket
Exit
Go home, John Rugby, I come anon.
here, 'tis here. I have seen the time, with my long
French thrift, you rogues, myself and skirted page.
sometimes, leaving the fear of God on the left hand
horses: the duke himself will be to-morrow at
the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.
Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
Falstaff's and our meeting, they will at once
SCENE V. A room in the Garter Inn.
for missing your meetings and appointments.
Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter, for it
and I shall procure-a you de good guest, de earl,
with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go
keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for the fellow
neither here nor there.
Have with you to see this monster.
To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee
will be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the
I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.
I'll to the doctor: he hath my good will,
Not so, an't please your worship.
his urinals about his knave's costard when I have
Ay, that I do, as well as I love any woman in
what he gets more of her than sharp words, let it
Got's will, and his passion of my heart! I had as
With all his might
humour on me, that is the very note of it.
with any detection in my hand, my desires had
Give you good morrow, sir.
You may, by marrying.
article of thy gentry.
Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go bear thou
What sayest thou, my bully-rook?
a pen, good uncle.
I will seek out Falstaff.
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
Welsh devil Hugh?
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS
abide the smell of hot meat since. Why do your
Eight and nine, sir.
Give your worship good morrow.
and then judge of my merit.
Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
Let us wag, then.
No quips now, Pistol! Indeed, I am in the waist two
Venetian admittance.
broke open my lodge.
He is a better scholar than I thought he was.
Come, coz, come, coz, we stay for you. A word with
and how my transformation hath been washed and
an old cloak makes a new jerkin, a withered
All his successors gone before him hath done't, and
command, I have turned away my other guests: they
I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a poor
Be not as extreme in submission
Reason, you rogue, reason: thinkest thou I'll
not of him in the court. Let me speak with the
comfort. She calls you, coz: I'll leave you.
she will: and truly she deserves it, for if there
basket. Go up, I'll bring linen for him straight.
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz: what I do
understandings for thy cases and the numbers of the
place and person, generally allowed for your many
basket again, to meet him at the door with it, as
Exit
Forbear, here's company.
That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, marry her?
Doctor Caius,--
you.
of man's disposition is able to bear.
draws on. Now, the hot-blooded gods assist me!
Now, whence come you?
Truly, for mine own part, I would little or nothing
Ten and eleven?
Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We
My hand, bully, thou shalt have egress and regress,
Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my
the third time, I hope good luck lies in odd
Sir, he is within, and I would I could do a good
Sure, one of you does not serve heaven well, that
It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as
It is qui, quae, quod: if you forget your 'quies,'
Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.
It is no matter-a ver dat: do not you tell-a me
Those that betray them do no treachery.
see your time, take her by the band, away with her
so, Master Page? He hath wronged me, indeed he
By gar, me vill kill de priest, for he speak for a
Exeunt DOCTOR CAIUS and RUGBY
host, thine Ephesian, calls.
Ay.
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor:
Readins, of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and
Let's go in, gentlemen, but, trust me, we'll mock
Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring:
Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel? Why, now let
for, sure, unless he know some strain in me, that I
Enter FENTON
another to Page's wife, who even now gave me good
well, Lucifer, well, Barbason, well, yet they are
I must advance the colours of my love
should, he cannot creep into a halfpenny purse,
[Aside to SIMPLE]  I am glad he is so quiet: if he
carry't, he will carry't, 'tis in his buttons, he
Till then farewell, sir: she must needs go in,
Yes: and you heard what the other told me?
any such sort, as they say, but in the way of
Ay, marry, was it, mussel-shell: what would you with her?
Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you, follow,
you.
Remember, William, focative is caret.
What, sir?
I'll make a shaft or a bolt on't: 'slid, 'tis but
a man: surely I think you have charms, la, yes, in truth.
nay-word, that you may know one another's mind, and
I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that
the peace: you have showed yourself a wise
Alas, he speaks but for his friend.
shovel-boards, that cost me two shilling and two
Base Phrygian Turk!
Two yards, and more.
Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?
be looked against. Now, could I could come to her
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
napkins, that, Master Brook, there was the rankest
I warrant. What, Robin, I say!
Exit ROBIN
Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speaks
Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
Well, be gone: I will not miss her.
foot, sometimes my portly belly.
own people.
distemper he is in now: I am glad the fat knight is not here.
She's coming, to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a father!
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire,
himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page: but
No, forsooth: he hath but a little wee face, with a
We are come to you to do a good office, master parson.
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS, disguised, with others as Fairies
that pass. Peter Simple, you say your name is?
He loves the gallimaufry: Ford, perpend.
By the Lord, a buck-basket! rammed me in with foul
given me this morning, but I defy all angels, in
Re-enter BARDOLPH, with FORD disguised
Nay, good, sweet husband! Good gentlemen, let him
Exeunt SHALLOW and SIR HUGH EVANS
above your eye?
[Aside]  Ah, sweet Anne Page!
Ay, forsooth, I'll fetch it you.
So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
What say you, Scarlet and John?
'Oman, art thou lunatics? hast thou no
home indeed?
Fed in heart, whose flames aspire
to your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion!
There will we make our peds of roses,
their swords to pawn. Follow me, lads of peace,
the grate, like a geminy of baboons. I am damned in
Why went you not with master doctor, maid?
Empty the basket, I say!
You say he has been thrown in the rivers and has
a muffler and a kerchief, and so escape.
What's the matter, good Mistress Page?
Exeunt
ACT I
Ay, forsooth, and, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?
With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,
Lapis.
[Aside to DOCTOR CAIUS]  Pray you let us not be
I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man
she? We are simple men, we do not know what's
Away with Slender and with him at Eton
With juice of balm and every precious flower:
twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go
traverse, to see thee here, to see thee there, to
with me: I'll be horn-mad.
chiding than a great deal of heart-break.
To shallow rivers, to whose falls-
if I be drunk, I'll be drunk with those that have
yet, till my mother be dead: but what though? Yet I
and have given ourselves without scruple to hell,
A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not
So will I	if he come under my hatches, I'll never
We will do it.
[Coming forward]  Let me see't, let me see't, O, let
How Falstaff, varlet vile,
[Aside]  Doctors doubt that: if Anne Page be my
Me tank you for dat.
Which I with sword will open.
display to the night.
My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain
Enter MISTRESS PAGE
'Tis unreasonable! Will you take up your wife's
In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and
--said I well?--and thy name shall be Brook. It is
name is Ford.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.
Discard, bully Hercules, cashier: let them wag, trot, trot.
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.
Hark, I will tell you what our sport shall be.
Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
jack-an-ape to Anne Page.
Who mutually hath answer'd my affection,
Pray heaven it be not full of knight again.
Exeunt
And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.
Reads
Why, then, let kibes ensue.
half, for easing me of the carriage.
Vengeance of Jenny's case! fie on her! never name
Nan Page my daughter and my little son
I most fehemently desire you you will also look that
Do you think there is truth in them?
Exit
Where is Nan now and her troop of fairies, and the
Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels:
you make grand preparation for a duke de Jamany: by
You'll not bear a letter for me, you rogue! you
about me, I am no gibbet for you. Go. A short knife
on the gown the while.
sure of your husband now?
And given to fornications, and to taverns and sack
Enter PAGE, FORD, MISTRESS PAGE, and MISTRESS FORD
[To PAGE]  Will you go with us to behold it? My
In shape profane.
our element we know nothing. Come down, you witch,
Hath a great scene: the image of the jest
and lie under Mount Pelion. Well, I will find you
the knight is not here, now he shall see his own foolery.
I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on
Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH
O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You're shamed,
Nay, I know not: it makes me almost ready to
souls, and you a curer of bodies, if you should
for a search, and away went I for foul clothes. But
I will teach the children their behaviors, and I
come, methinks his flesh is punished, he shall have
Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know him not:
three umpires in this matter, as I understand, that
My humour shall not cool: I will incense Page to
Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be
That cannot choose but amaze him.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.
get you a pair of horns.
How now, my eyas-musket! what news with you?
Exeunt
wrangle with mine own honesty. I'll entertain
Exit
Fe, fe, fe, fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je
Be practised well to this, or they'll ne'er do't.
make known to you why I have done this. Come,
Received and did deliver to our age
as sure as his guts are made of puddings.
Let me see thee froth and lime: I am at a word, follow.
woman leads an ill life with him: he's a very
house the hour she appointed me.
Exeunt
Let the court of France show me such another. I see
little page, of all loves: her husband has a
Shallow, and another gentleman, from Frogmore, over
Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any
Ay, that there was, mine host, one that hath taught
to notify that her husband will be absence from his
rough things.
on 't, Jove, a foul fault! When gods have hot
Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room:
yourself know how easy it is to be such an offender.
No weapons, sir. There comes my master, Master
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS
Ha, do I perceive dat? have you make-a de sot of
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house which
Sir Hugh is there, is he?
'Convey,' the wise it call. 'Steal!' foh! a fico
thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
If he be not amazed, he will be mocked, if he be
This passes!
fire and water for such a kind heart. But yet I
And burn him with their tapers.
Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the hunter?
you're overthrown, you're undone for ever!
you of some conveyance: in the house you cannot
I have operations which be humours of revenge.
There is an old tale goes that Herne the hunter,
old: it were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles
Cannot attain it, why, then,--hark you hither!
Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE
Gloucestershire.
Have with you. You'll come to dinner, George.
his suit and lead him on with a fine-baited delay,
Conceal them, or thou diest.
between you.
Exeunt
Pinch him, fairies, mutually,
Look who comes yonder: she shall be our messenger
Now, good Mistress Anne,--
Good morrow, good wife.
down, I come to speak with her, indeed.
picture, she says, that you wot of: Master Ford,
riot, take your vizaments in that.
with you,--and you have been a man long known to me,
This 'tis to be married! this 'tis to have linen
woman's heart, and, I warrant you, they could never
of a lime-kiln.
Adieu, good Sir Hugh.
dances, he has eyes of youth, he writes verses, he
never else cross me thus.
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
Seese is not good to give putter, your belly is all putter.
The dinner is on the table, my father desires your
By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford, this
How now, Simple! where have you been? I must wait
worships' company.
I'll show you here at large. Hark, good mine host.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
a man, and what a thing should I have been when I
despise one that is false, or as I despise one that
SCENE III. A field near Windsor.
And, in the lawful name of marrying,
ACT V
is not true. The knight, Sir John, is there, and, I
Exeunt PAGE, FORD, and SIR HUGH EVANS
What tellest thou me of black and blue? I was
Anne the jest, how my father stole two geese out of
yet look after thee? Wilt thou, after the expense
Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?
jealous in France.
wing of all occasions. But whatsoever I have
Go, John, go inquire for my master, I doubt
Singing
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE
well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness, that I
SCENE III. A room in FORD'S house.
Why, he hath not been thrice in my company! What
A trial, come.
Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to her, I will
But not kissed your keeper's daughter?
will be a biting affliction.
To shallow  and c.
go between you both, and in any case have a
office of love, but in all the accoutrement,
cannot cog and say thou art this and that, like a
But let our plot go forward: let our wives
you'll undertake her no more?
I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.
He, he, I can never hit on's name. There is such a
white, and cry 'mum,' she cries 'budget,' and by
Here, sir!
the hearing.
Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met:
what thou wert, if Fortune thy foe were not, Nature
beseech you, be ruled by your well-willers. I will
The expressure that it bears, green let it be,
'tis a playing-day, I see.
Fery well: what is it?
be a follower, but now you are a leader. Whether
though I cannot remember what I did when you made me
It could not be judged, sir.
officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman that
Now, Master Slender,--
there should be terrors in him that he should not
another Nan, but, I detest, an honest maid as ever
O, sir!
Exit SIR HUGH EVANS
I thank thee for that humour.
Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you how
SCENE III. A street leading to the Park.
Tarry you a little-a while.
horns, Master Brook: and, Master Brook, he hath
Exit FALSTAFF
vill kill de Jack priest, and I have appointed mine
gentlemen.
And marry her at Eton. Go send to Falstaff straight.
yet I wrong him to call him poor, they say the
friend, and I fear not mine own shame so much as his
And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give thee
should have borne the humoured letter to her, but I
for, believe me, I hear the parson is no jester.
in his jealousy till now.
the adoption of abominable terms, and by him that
Search Windsor Castle, elves, within and out:
make one. Though we are justices and doctors and
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
matters grow to your likings.
He's too big to go in there. What shall I do?
thing to you, wherein I must very much lay open mine
have her, Master Brook, Master Brook, you shall
Let it be so. Sir John,
that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O,
She is no match for you.
seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two Edward
Both young and old, one with another, Ford,
picked--with the devil's name!--out of my
And in this shape when you have brought him thither,
birding-pieces. Creep into the kiln-hole.
Exit SIMPLE
descend, my chambers are honourable: fie! privacy?
Well, sir.
the boy never need to understand any thing, for
I warrant thee, nobody hears, mine own people, mine
that I love thee. I will not say, pity me, 'tis
Enter ANNE PAGE, with wine, MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE, following
his dole! They can tell you how things go better
concerning your marriage.
gar, it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in dee
Exeunt
Exit ROBIN
Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man
basket: I quaked for fear, lest the lunatic knave
not for his counsellor. You are not young, no more
Has Page any brains? hath he any eyes? hath he any
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.
with half Windsor at his heels, to search for such a
Would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
They are gone but to meet the duke, villain: do not
Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
I may quarter, coz.
it, spend it, spend more, spend all I have, only
Is there not a double excellency in this?
knows more of Anne's mind than I do, nor can do more
wife, come, Mistress Page. I pray you, pardon me,
What, John! What, Robert!
Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed the
in the parliament for the putting down of men. How
the very yea and the no is, the French doctor, my
country, simple though I stand here.
Sings
The night is dark, light and spirits will become it
And as I find her, so am I affected.
Why, how now! what does Master Fenton here?
I would I could have spoken with the woman herself,
war-like, court-like, and learned preparations.
I have writ me here a letter to her: and here
intrusion, for they say, if money go before, all
Potent at court: he, none but he, shall have her,
I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne Page,
places: your hearts are mighty, your skins are
grace, I hope: that were a trick indeed! but
Love use Reason for his physician, he admits him
My riots past, my wild societies,
I think the devil will not have me damned, lest the
Aside to them
which is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry
shall find it a great charge: and to be up early
I know not what: 'tis the heart, Master Page, 'tis
Why, sir, for my part I say the gentleman had drunk
Believe me, there is no such thing in me.
As I am a Christians soul now, look you, this is the
He hath wronged me, Master Page.
husband had him of. What do you call your knight's
'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel:
as great discreetly as we can.
Well, I hope it be not so.
bold-beating oaths, under the shelter of your
sack finely.
friend of mine come to town tells me there is three
'Twas a good sensible fellow: well.
Exit
de knight, de lords, de gentlemen, my patients.
your heart to see it. Her husband goes this morning
speaks holiday, he smells April and May: he will
indeed! I ne'er made my will yet, I thank heaven, I
Thou'rt a good boy: this secrecy of thine shall be
might be knighted. I shall think the worse of fat
she'll fit it.
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher
Sir?
Mistress Ford! I have had ford enough, I was thrown
Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE and ANNE PAGE
Why, man, why?
I' faith, I'll eat nothing, I thank you as much as
I melancholy! I am not melancholy. Get you home, go.
Give ear to his motions, Master Slender: I will
Go, Mistress Ford,
sleep? Master Ford awake! awake, Master Ford!
Will't please your worship to come in, sir?
[Aside to MISTRESS FORD]  Heard you that?
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
That is a good William. What is he, William, that
forest. Send me a cool rut-time, Jove, or who can
No, good Master Fenton.
'Tis true, Master Shallow.
than I can: you may ask your father, here he comes.
other: and she bade me tell your worship that her
another experiment of his suspicion: but I am glad
hot venison pasty to dinner: come, gentlemen, I hope
Enter Host, DOCTOR CAIUS, and RUGBY
broke bread: we had an hour's talk of that wart. I
The purpose why, is here: in which disguise,
always count you my deer.
Now, Master Slender: love him, daughter Anne.
I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. Hear the truth
wealth of Windsor Castle.
Ay, forsooth, and then you may come and see the
In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak:
Is this true, Pistol?
the rest of their company from their sport, to make
Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!
there is shrewd construction made of her. Now, Sir
serving-man a fresh tapster. Go, adieu.
the Garter.
Nominativo, hig, hag, hog, pray you, mark:
embattled against me. What say you to't, Sir John?
shall be any further afflicted, we two will still be
I will knog your urinals about your knave's cockscomb
What say you to young Master Fenton? he capers, he
But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford's wife and
offer it: but these that accuse him in his intent
Ay, ay, I must bear it.
And Master Slender's your master?
not what 'twas to be beaten till lately. Follow
nay-word how to know one another: I come to her in
With some diffused song: upon their sight,
It is an old coat.
that I have lost my edifice by mistaking the place
Bless you, sir!
For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne
bilbo, in the circumference of a peck, hilt to
good friends for three reprieves for you and your
my daughter.
Gets into the basket, they cover him with foul linen
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and Master mine,
your ear, she's as fartuous a civil modest wife, and
If I do find it: well.
And bowl'd to death with turnips!
That, indeed, Sir John, is my business.
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
Vile worm, thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth.
Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
Nay, he will do it. 'Tis a goodly credit for you.
Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the
Diable! Jack Rugby,--mine host de Jarteer,--have I
Old woman! what old woman's that?
all he was in woman's apparel, I would not have had
Marry, were they.
Now, sir, who's a cuckold now? Master Brook,
how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent, when 'tis upon
the Garter?
I make bold to press with so little preparation upon
my name is Brook, only for a jest.
good will to the maid?
What wouldst thou have, boor? what: thick-skin?
Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.
Ay, and as idle as she may hang together, for want
Pray you, go, Master Page.
bestowed much on her, followed her with a doting
I'll have my brains ta'en out and buttered, and give
So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman's promise.
would not ha' your distemper in this kind for the
I do not misdoubt my wife, but I would be loath to
Sings
Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much, my name is Brook.
for the phrase!
knave, mine host.
wonderful. The best courtier of them all, when the
Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these times
Master Slender had her, or, in sooth, I would Master
What a damned Epicurean rascal is this! My heart is
Falstaff's boy with her! Good plots, they are laid,
True, Master Page. Up, gentlemen: you shall see
Methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously.
Not a whit.
give me so much of your time in exchange of it, as
mine honour thou hadst it not.
suffered to bring this woman to evil for your good.
The maid hath given consent to go with him.
money, next, give me your hand, and last, as I am a
Marry, this is our device,
tell-tale nor no breed-bate: his worst fault is,
you, coach after coach, letter after letter, gift
Well, I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck
About him, fairies, sing a scornful rhyme,
him, if he came.
That silk will I go buy.
Marry, sir, we'll bring you to Windsor, to one
only, Mistress Ford, in the simple
use her as the key of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer,
Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?
Enter FENTON and Host
And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered, and
i' the church, I would have swinged him, or he
Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your porter.
Vat is de clock, Jack?
Exit
Were they his men?
Where is mine host?
a-birding, she desires you once more to come to her
Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
And you, sir! Would you speak with me?
Enter SLENDER
Master doctor, my daughter is in green: when you
Enter PAGE and MISTRESS PAGE
I may not conceal them, sir.
SCENE IV. A room in FORD'S house.
Enter FORD
I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a me dat
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
knaves, his hinds, were called forth by their
and gold and silver, is her grandsire upon his
Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
womanhood and the witness of a good conscience,
And till he tell the truth,
I thank thee, and I pray thee, once to-night
Now, master Brook, you come to know what hath passed
us, ha, ha?
Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.
It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in
Have you importuned her to such a purpose?
Page, which is pretty virginity.
Be sure of that,--two other husbands.
time of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them?
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs:
Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak
Enter FALSTAFF and PISTOL
not such a name. Page is an ass, a secure ass: he
I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him
so am I, ha, ha! then there's more sympathy: you
The horn, I say. Farewell.
bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation, 'Armigero.'
I shall do that that is reason.
To stay for me at church 'twixt twelve and one,
For shame! never stand 'you had rather' and 'you
I went to her in white, and cried 'mum,' and she
woman! My bed shall be abused, my coffers
I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.
potatoes, let it thunder to the tune of Green
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Aside to her
sport, I will show you a monster. Master doctor,
Alas, what noise?
If dere be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.
You moonshine revellers and shades of night,
You shall have An fool's-head of your own. No, I
Ha! a fat woman! the knight may be robbed: I'll
you'll be laughed at.
How now, good woman? how dost thou?
He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.
as they say, and know the world.
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night:
SCENE IV. A room in PAGE'S house.
come a little nearer this ways.
I would all the world might be cozened, for I have
Go in with us and see: we have an hour's talk with
I think you know him, Master Doctor Caius, the
master, be not afraid.
heard a man of his place, gravity and learning, so
am not such a sickly creature, I give heaven praise.
Fear not you that. Go get us properties
it? dispense with trifles, what is it?
of it: he came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh.
whole, and let burnt sack be the issue. Come, lay
What is your genitive case plural, William?
By gar, den, I have as mush mock-vater as de
I pray you, bear vitness that me have stay six or
How now, Master Ford!
that by the way, I praise heaven for it.
Marry, she hath received your letter, for the which
to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this
MISTRESS PAGE and MISTRESS FORD come forward
With wit or steel?
thy lungs military: art thou there? it is thine
wickedness: old folks, you know, have discretion,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
Let him die: sheathe thy impatience, throw cold
I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff from
Exit FALSTAFF
This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put my
by your leave, good mistress.
Thou'rt an emperor, Caesar, Keisar, and Pheezar. I
Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any
questions in his accidence.
nor into a pepper-box: but, lest the devil that
I'll provide you a chain, and I'll do what I can to
They retire
Enter SIMPLE
'Tis one of the best discretions of a 'oman as ever
thinking? Sure, they sleep, he hath no use of them.
Come to me at your convenient leisure, and you shall
looked for Master Caius, that calls himself doctor of physic?
in one Mistress Page, gives intelligence of Ford's
as any is between this and his head, he hath fought
Exeunt
In emerald tufts, flowers purple, blue and white,
your good heart! I wished your venison better, it
looks, your red-lattice phrases, and your
but thee, and thou deservest it.
Away, Sir Corporal Nym!
Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your house.
hell for swearing to gentlemen my friends, you were
fine and recovery, he will never, I think, in the
In good sadness, I am sorry that for my sake you
towards our wives are a yoke of his discarded men,
SCENE III. A room in the Garter Inn.
But that is not the question: the question is
will you go, Mistress Page?
wind were but long enough to say my prayers, I would repent.
I could be knighted.
here comes Doctor Caius.
You jack'nape, give-a this letter to Sir Hugh, by
Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me:
Nay, I will consent to act any villany against him,
Old, cold, withered and of intolerable entrails?
ill employment!
Yes, by all means, if it be but to scrape the
turned my daughter into green, and, indeed, she is
rather trust a Fleming with my butter, Parson Hugh
Exit RUGBY
me as you will.
delivered me, the knave constable had set me i' the
meaning, 'resolutely:' his meaning is good.
see thee pass thy punto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy
to stay within: I like his money well. O, here he comes.
I marvel I hear not of Master Brook, he sent me word
Well, Mistress Ford, what of her?
Enter SHALLOW
will trust his wife, he will not be jealous. I will
Love my wife!
should he not be publicly shamed.
By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me,
I sit at ten pounds a week.
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
Exit
Nay, do not fly, I think we have watch'd you now
sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait upon my
Good hearts, devise something: any extremity rather
Enter PAGE, FORD, MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and SIR HUGH EVANS
And tells me 'tis a thing impossible
we shall drink down all unkindness.
'tis not convenient you should be cozened. Fare you well.
Sayest thou so, old Jack? go thy ways, I'll make
Master Page is an honest man. Never a wife in
How now, Meg!
fifteen i' the litter: and you may know by my size
men, as long as I have an eye to make difference of
Without the show of both, fat Falstaff
'Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues,
keep his house, and I wash, wring, brew, bake,
woman, for in the shape of man, Master Brook, I fear
the truth of his words, but they do no more adhere
To give our hearts united ceremony.
my intelligence is true, my jealousy is reasonable.
We'll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,
and prabbles, and desire a marriage between Master
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and
Your worship says very true: I pray your worship,
you are so crossed.
--give, when she is able to overtake seventeen years
Is it? I will then address me to my appointment.
would have sworn his disposition would have gone to
'tis a good dog.
ready here hard by in the brew-house: and when I
Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing into the
Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says: I pray
Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise
She seemingly obedient likewise hath
in friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends.
Mistress Page, remember you your cue.
I'll be sworn,
Come in, woman!
his rapier.
Exit
here. Do you understand me?
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Exeunt
gives her folly motion and advantage: and now she's
Master Fenton, talk not to me, my mind is heavy: I
you, pardon me, he's a justice of peace in his
They burn him with their tapers
The children must
to-night at my house, where I will desire thee to
So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
their limbs whole and hack our English.
friend for a man. I keep but three men and a boy
O good sir!
matter: I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again,
Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
Cavaleiro-justice, I say!
the world at his book. I pray you, ask him some
Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st thou?
Exit
Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of
see the light of our fairies. Remember, son Slender,
everlasting liberty if I tell you of it, for he
she's a witch, forbade her my house and hath
Exit
Here's no man.
Re-enter RUGBY
good morrow.
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
that,--hissing hot,--think of that, Master Brook.
Shallow, and here young Master Slender, that
though I had never so good means, as desire, to make
By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him.
Elves, list your names, silence, you airy toys.
A puffed man?
Enter SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Now, mistress, how chance you went not with Master Slender?
And sped you, sir?
be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one. You must
It is a life that I have desired: I will thrive.
marvellous infection to the little page, and truly
Sir John Falstaff.
devil guide his cudgel afterwards!
take an ill advantage of his assence: you are undone.
'The humour of it,' quoth a'! here's a fellow
Let's away, follow me.
a green-a box: do intend vat I speak? a green-a box.
the Welshman with my cheese, an Irishman with my
peat the door for Master Page.
The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest.
me for ever be your table-sport, let them say of
As in offence.
She shall go with him: her mother hath intended,
my cousin Slender, and this day we shall have our answer.
paid to Master Brook, his horses are arrested for
My name is Corporal Nym, I speak and I avouch, 'tis
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
Ay, that I do, and have done any time these three
with you. Your father and my uncle hath made
no desires.
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.
turtles from jays.
And a thousand vagram posies.
[Within]  Who's within there? ho!
Become the forest better than the town?
The young man is an honest man.
Pray you, sir, was't not the wise woman of
Bless you, sir!
What shall de honest man do in my closet? dere is
Bridget lost the handle of her fan, I took't upon
shuffle, to hedge and to lurch, and yet you, rogue,
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.
devils' additions, the names of fiends: but
else, nor that well neither.
shallow,--a death that I abhor, for the water swells
figures out of your husband's brains. If they can
I am sure, I have received none, unless experience
I your lady, Sir John! alas, I should be a pitiful lady!
it.
of no having: he kept company with the wild prince
I spake with the old woman about it.
and down late, but notwithstanding,--to tell you in
The truth is, she and I, long since contracted,
I mean it not, I seek you a better husband.
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee:
now with the doctor at the deanery, and there married.
say they be fled, Germans are honest men.
not Goliath with a weaver's beam, because I know
would do reason.
your worship. Mistress Page hath her hearty
On my word, it will serve him, she's as big as he
mouth. Therefore, precisely, can you carry your
I will look further into't: and I have a disguise
deceived me. How melancholies I am! I will knog
Ay, come, quick.
What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday-
What shall I do? There is a gentleman my dear
and patient churchman. You must go with me, master doctor.
lay my countenance to pawn, I have grated upon my
Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your
Show me now, William, some declensions of your pronouns.
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
To shallow rivers, to whose falls
Well, farewell, I am in great haste now.
I will tell her.
In a most hideous and dreadful manner:
encounter, after we had embraced, kissed, protested,
And his soft couch defile.
It will be found so, Master Page. Master Doctor
You are a very simplicity 'oman: I pray you peace.
with us? we have sport in hand.
To have her, or no. Go, say the woman told me so.
Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go you
the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to
Divide me like a bribe buck, each a haunch: I will
Master Brook, I will first make bold with your
me die, for I have lived long enough: this is the
Exit DOCTOR CAIUS
would have searched it, but fate, ordaining he
liquor. Ah, ha! Mistress Ford and Mistress Page
Ay, forsooth, I have spoke with her and we have a
to give her, but have given largely to many to know
world! One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with
Her mother, ever strong against that match
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
and there's my harvest-home.
eternal food to his jealousy.
I am blest in your acquaintance. Do you know Ford,
the ort 'dissolutely:' the ort is, according to our
Sings
[Within]  Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford! here's
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.
Ford differs! To thy great comfort in this mystery
Sleeves, hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes, let
women's modesty, and gave such orderly and
You have, Master Slender, I stand wholly for you:
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.
hears with ear'? why, it is affectations.
The tevil and his tam! what phrase is this, 'He
and hiding mine honour in my necessity, am fain to
He doth object I am too great of birth--,
Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne
any dishonesty.
cuckold Ford.
Or any kind of light,
Genitive,--horum, harum, horum.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end:
your ear, I would have no words of it,--my master
follow, follow, follow.
clothes? Come away.
Where be my horses? speak well of them, varletto.
much. No, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes
taunt of one that makes fritters of English? This
loose any longer, you must be pinioned.
is deceived, or Sir John.
with obscured lights, which, at the very instant of
she will, say what she will, take all, pay all, go
down, my husband will come into the chamber.
And these are not fairies? I was three or four
By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.
no honest man dat shall come in my closet.
man, I'll do you your master what good I can: and
I have lived fourscore years and upward, I never
Peace!
And what is 'a stone,' William?
You do amaze her: hear the truth of it.
Enter FALSTAFF disguised as Herne
How now, mine host!
this? Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too? shall I
laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee: tell her
The luce is the fresh fish, the salt fish is an old coat.
way, old Windsor way, and every way but the town
I pray you now, good master Slender's serving-man,
villain! Somebody call my wife. Youth in a basket!
I am glad he went not in himself: if he had found
ACT III
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.
You will do it?
Ay, there's the point, sir.
By day or night,
dat I shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I
go and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert, a box,
Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it
Buck, buck, buck! Ay, buck, I warrant you, buck,
Ay, dat is very good, excellent.
This is well, he has made us his vlouting-stog. I
transform me to a piece of cheese!
Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would
Enter DOCTOR CAIUS and RUGBY
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away
Exit SIMPLE
tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh
Enter ROBIN
there's a hole made in your best coat, Master Ford.
Lust is but a bloody fire,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
And 'Honi soit qui mal y pense' write
Peace your tattlings! What is 'fair,' William?
[Aside to SIMPLE]  Are you avised o' that? you
Marry, I thank you for it, I thank you for that good
all his ancestors that come after him may: they may
Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.
Exeunt SHALLOW, SLENDER, PAGE, and Host
him.
SCENE II. A room in FORD'S house.
court lay at Windsor, could never have brought her
Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
Never.
second edition: he will print them, out of doubt,
Anne Page is, at a farm-house a-feasting, and thou
door. Follow my heels, Rugby.
By the yea and no, I think the 'oman is a witch
master parson, who writes himself 'Armigero,' in any
No, Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.
I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my
I'll sauce them: they have had my house a week at
I ken the wight: he is of substance good.
amazed, he will every way be mocked.
Vherefore vill you not meet-a me?
for thee, let me have thy voice in my behalf: if
seem to scorch me up like a burning-glass! Here's
is dat knave Rugby?
How now, sweet Frank! why art thou melancholy?
And in the height of this bath, when I was more than
chambers, search, seek, find out: I'll warrant
Two thousand, fair woman: and I'll vouchsafe thee
For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.
gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy Ford's wife.
Jack Rugby, he is dead already, if he be come.
Gentle Master Fenton,
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
Ah, in good sadness, is he, and talks of the basket
married un garcon, a boy, un paysan, by gar, a boy,
that is my true humour.
We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and
poor woman.
out!' that any madness I ever yet beheld seemed but
Does he not wear a great round beard, like a
How now, bully-rook! thou'rt a gentleman.
Enter FORD, PAGE, SHALLOW, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Ay, sir, like who more bold.
mirth: Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill
and friend Simple by your name, which way have you
Enter MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE
SCENE I. A field near Frogmore.
To shallow--
I thank you for my venison, Master Shallow.
Falstaff, and drink canary with him.
thy husband were dead: I'll speak it before the
By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de vorld, he
If you go out in your own semblance, you die, Sir
other places she enlargeth her mirth so far that
Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and Justice
man may hear this shower sing in the wind. And
Heaven guide him to thy husband's cudgel, and the
Villany, take your rapier.
that fretted in their own grease: think of that,--a
and keep place together than the Hundredth Psalm to
That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said,
been cozened and beaten too. If it should come to
Re-enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN
description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
To pinch her by the hand, and, on that token,
Enter FORD with PISTOL, and PAGE with NYM
indeed she is given too much to allicholy and
Why, alas, what's the matter?
Dispatched! I'll make the best in Gloucestershire
by the figure, and such daubery as this is, beyond
Farewell to your worship.
me,  but she's gone.
FALSTAFF hides himself
I love the sport well but I shall as soon quarrel at
Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened: I ha'
into the ford, I have my belly full of ford.
till he hath pawned his horses to mine host of the Garter.
SCENE I. A room in the Garter Inn.
and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for
How? to send him word they'll meet him in the park
three, for so I have promised, and I'll be as good
bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?
Exit BARDOLPH
daughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius' wife.
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
A stone.
Where's Bede? Go you, and where you find a maid
little yellow beard, a Cain-coloured beard.
Sir, I hear you are a scholar,--I will be brief
your master is hard at door, if he bid you set it
come under one body's hand.
the hardest voice of her behavior, to be Englished
Nay, I'll ne'er believe that, I have to show to the contrary.
unto thee: knock, I say.
you, I am of the church, and will be glad to do my
O,--vocativo, O.
I know not which pleases me better, that my husband
sent your worship a morning's draught of sack.
thy hand, celestial, so. Boys of art, I have
instance and argument to commend themselves: I
Exit FENTON
assistant or go-between parted from me: I say I
been into Thames, ere I will leave her thus. Her
The devil take one party and his dam the other! and
provoked and instigated by his distemper, and,
see but the issue of my jealousy: if I cry out thus
what she would have given, briefly, I have pursued
Ay, cousin Slender, and 'Custalourum.
have I encompassed you? go to, via!
blame me to piss my tallow? Who comes here? my
strike at me, that your arrow hath glanced.
Cuckold! Wittol!--Cuckold! the devil himself hath
true: my name is Nym and Falstaff loves your wife.
Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.
down, obey him: quickly, dispatch.
Exit RUGBY
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?
will carry't.
towards my wife, I would turn her loose to him, and
How now, Mistress Ford!
undone! Fly, run, hue and cry, villain! I am undone!
Genitive case!
Aside
like a strong distillation, with stinking clothes
Here, boys, here, here! shall we wag?
upon't! what have I forgot?
Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was
I'll never--
The truth being known,
the least, if the love of soldier can suffice,--
with me: I'll tell you all, Master Brook. Since I
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.
Exit BARDOLPH
sir?
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen,
Be not dismayed.
Tell him, cavaleiro-justice, tell him, bully-rook.
Go, go, sweet Sir John: Mistress Page and I will
Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you.
I seek to heal it only by his wealth:
this letter to Mistress Page, and thou this to
This news distracts me!
Exeunt
man, and signifies love.
Do so, good mine host.
beyond Eton, they threw me off from behind one of
the tune of 'Green Sleeves.' What tempest, I trow,
but the devil, and we shall know him by his horns.
I see I cannot get thy father's love,
death's-bed--Got deliver to a joyful resurrections!
My maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brentford, has a
was in the basket!
Why, did you take her in green?
look some linen for your head.
And by my side wear steel? then, Lucifer take all!
virtue out of our hearts by the head and shoulders
I should love thee but as a property.
there come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me here.
I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me
know that of your mouth or of your lips, for divers
What is the matter, sir?
Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn
one eye upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded,
notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn on a
upon no trail, never trust me when I open again.
Songs and Sonnets here.
Why, sir, she's a good creature. Lord Lord! your
How now!
you might slip away ere he came. But what make you here?
The spirit of wantonness is, sure, scared out of
Let her approach.
That neither singly can be manifested,
Trust me, a good knot: I have good cheer at home,
Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and DOCTOR CAIUS
that time the jealous rascally knave her husband
I say you shall.
He hath studied her will, and translated her will,
Exit MISTRESS QUICKLY
it among the whitsters in Datchet-mead, and there
knight with my taber.
Do so. Between nine and ten, sayest thou?
renowned French physician.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it:
But is my husband coming?
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?
water on thy choler: go about the fields with me
shall hear how things go, and, I warrant, to your
for their sakes, more than the villanous inconstancy
I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised
goes to them by his note: there is no hiding you in the house.
And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
And at the deanery, where a priest attends,
Re-enter FALSTAFF in woman's clothes, and MISTRESS PAGE
between me and Ford's wife?
and that I hope is an unmeasurable distance.
By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France, it is not
once more search with me.
The several chairs of order look you scour
is, Master Page, fidelicet Master Page, and there is
Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes:
I will answer it straight, I have done all this.
By these gloves, then, 'twas he.
Aside to MISTRESS FORD
compound of villanous smell that ever offended nostril.
Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts.
and require her to solicit your master's desires to
them, in a slough of mire, and set spurs and away,
at Master Page's.
beguiled Master Slender of his chain cozened him of
I rather will suspect the sun with cold
A justice of peace sometimes may be beholding to his
I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at
Speak louder.
with him, I'll make him dance. Will you go, gentles?
You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen, you hear it.
wide of his own respect.
but if you say, 'Marry her,' I will marry her, that
Pardon, good father! good my mother, pardon!
master in the way of marriage.
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
one. I come before to tell you. If you know
not what I seek, show no colour for my extremity, let
Adieu, good master doctor.
Exit
I come to him.
Believe it, for you know it. There is money, spend
man here to school. Look, where his master comes,
Yes, marry, have I, what of that?
Trust me, a mad host. Follow, gentlemen, follow.
best lord, I would make thee my lady.
man. What a woman are you!--Away with him, away
And three or four more of their growth we'll dress
Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.
Exit
me see't! I'll in, I'll in. Follow your friend's
I had other things to have spoken with her too from
restitution. As I am a true spirit, welcome!
Come, to the forge with it then, shape it: I would
'Tis my fault, Master Page: I suffer for it.
that done, trudge with it in all haste, and carry
Come on, sir.
Thou art the Mars of malecontents: I second thee, troop on.
The offence is holy that she hath committed,
and at his heels a rabble of his companions, thither
polecat, you runyon! out, out! I'll conjure you,
Drawing him aside
beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow,
As many devils entertain, and 'To her, boy,' say I.
that way: but nobody but has his fault, but let
How near is he, Mistress Page?
for he cares not what he puts into the press, when
[Aside to MISTRESS PAGE]  Trust me, I thought on her:
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
better three hours too soon than a minute too late.
baseness, it is as much as I can do to keep the
Shuts SIMPLE in the closet
body in the house, here will be an old abusing of
None, I protest: but I'll give you a pottle of
Was the first motive that I woo'd thee, Anne:
Two.
Aside
My master, Sir John, is come in at your back-door,
Fie on sinful fantasy!
Falstaff as he will chafe at the doctor's marrying
Good Master Ford, be contented: you wrong yourself too much.
Exit
you two would marry.
think in their hearts they may effect, they will
Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her
SCENE II. A room in the Garter Inn.
Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal. Hector of Greece, my boy!
There is no remedy, I must cony-catch, I must shift.
married and have more occasion to know one another,
Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
A pebble.
Be avised, sir, and pass good humours: I will say
'Pless you from his mercy sake, all of you!
is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?
What, a hodge-pudding? a bag of flax?
Exeunt MISTRESS QUICKLY and ROBIN
case, William?
Amen!
We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young man,
respects, makes a beast a man, in some other, a man
You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes
Besides, I'll make a present recompense.
Enter Host and SIMPLE
are wise and full of gibes and vlouting-stocks, and
easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank twelve
Hark ye, Master Slender would speak a word with you.
is beaten black and blue, that you cannot see a
Mine host of the Garter!
like three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.
William, how many numbers is in nouns?
name, sirrah?
Exeunt
The dozen white louses do become an old coat well,
aqua-vitae bottle, or a thief to walk my ambling
I will never take you for my love again, but I will
consent to you: if any man may, you may as soon as
'Tis, 'tis his fortune.
many of these lisping hawthorn-buds, that come like
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see,
good parts aside I have no other charms.
Why, none but mine own people.
or her 'budget?' the white will decipher her well
is more, pensioners, but, I warrant you, all is one with her.
Ay, for fault of a better.
chamber: I'll be so bold as stay, sir, till she come
glover's paring-knife?
to heat as butter, a man of continual dissolution
o' the town commended him for a true man.
a merry knight. Will you go, An-heires?
Of what, son?
through the realm.
her husband, will be from home. Alas! the sweet
Why, look where he comes, and my good man too: he's
Exeunt Host, SHALLOW, and PAGE
What shall I do? I'll creep up into the chimney.
such alligant terms, and in such wine and sugar of
genitivo, hujus. Well, what is your accusative case?
the young man, he would have been horn-mad.
Well, I will visit her: tell her so, and bid her
as far from jealousy as I am from giving him cause,
During this song they pinch FALSTAFF. DOCTOR CAIUS  comes one way, and steals away a boy in green,  SLENDER another way, and takes off a boy in white,  and FENTON comes and steals away ANN PAGE.  A noise of hunting is heard within. All the  Fairies run away. FALSTAFF pulls off his buck's head, and rises
Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is
When I have told you that, I have told you all.
Why, thou must be thyself.
Mistress Anne Page: and the letter is, to desire
Prithee, hold thy peace.
[Within]  What, ho, gossip Ford! what, ho!
husband is this morning gone a-birding: I have
that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking, if the
I think there are, sir, I heard them talked of.
through Frogmore: I will bring thee where Mistress
By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman.
eyes too, examined my parts with most judicious
I know the young gentlewoman, she has good gifts.
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye did
Which of you know Ford of this town?
Where there was no proportion held in love.
seven, two, tree hours for him, and he is no come.
ill.
Gentlemen, I have dreamed to-night, I'll tell you my
When as I sat in Pabylon--
Of none but him, and swears he was carried out, the
a tailor to thee and shall make thee a new doublet
Enter Host
honest knaveries.
This is my father's choice.
Leave your prabbles, 'oman. What is the focative
too, howsoever he hath had intelligence.
money. I tell you for good will, look you: you
lie on my head.
flannel, ignorance itself is a plummet o'er me: use
there a wise woman with thee?
burnt sack to give me recourse to him and tell him
Ay, it is no matter.
and she's a great lubberly boy. If it had not been
throwing him into the water will do him a benefit.
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
The better that it pleases your good worship to ask.
I am glad, though you have ta'en a special stand to
By gar, me dank you for dat: by gar, I love you,
soul-curer and body-curer!
Behold what honest clothes you send forth to bleaching!
own imperfection: but, good Sir John, as you have
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
SCENE II. Windsor Park.
Each fair instalment, coat, and several crest,
the ear of the court, how I have been transformed
Melodious birds sings madrigals,
she carves, she gives the leer of invitation: I
Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
I may not go in without your worship: they will not
[Within]  Who's there?
Enter SHALLOW, SLENDER, and MISTRESS QUICKLY
Ay, indeed, sir.
No, I'll come no more i' the basket. May I not go
Nay, it is my maid's aunt of Brentford.
rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold, and in
Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to the king?
Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by
a boy for a girl. If I had been married to him, for
And down, down, adown-a,  and c.
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.
As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
master,--I may call him my master, look you, for I
Wilt thou revenge?
Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.
But can you affection the 'oman? Let us command to
You are the happier woman.
husband's purse: he hath a legion of angels.
peradventure prings goot discretions with it: there
Clap on more sails, pursue, up with your fights:
I'll go watch.
[Aside]  I think I shall drink in pipe wine first
frights English out of his wits.
lastly and finally, mine host of the Garter.
to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as
Yet seek my father's love, still seek it, sir:
I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on the lousy
hour is fixed, the match is made. Would any man
Fairies use flowers for their charactery.
Exit
on myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles
of ill opinions, here's the twin-brother of thy
have a friend here convey, convey him out. Be not
Why?
must come off, I'll sauce them. Come.
Sir Hugh, persuade me not, I will make a Star-
By the Lord, thou art a traitor to say so: thou
standing-bed and truckle-bed, 'tis painted about
eight and nine is the hour, Master Brook.
oeillades, sometimes the beam of her view gilded my
He is wise, sir, he knew your worship would kill
though I did.
Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.
search: there I shall find Falstaff: I shall be
Exeunt Host and BARDOLPH
By this hat, then, he in the red face had it, for
SCENE II. The same.
merited, either in my mind or, in my means, meed,
And so must I, sir: we have appointed to dine with
would have nothing lie on my head: I cannot be thus satisfied.
than follow him like a dwarf.
live like a poor gentleman born.
There is one Mistress Ford, sir:--I pray, come a
A buck-basket!
Mistress Page would desire you to send her your
Take your rapier, Jack, I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.
I thank your worship: I shall make my master glad
Enter FALSTAFF
How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the matter
belly's as cold as if I had swallowed snowballs for
impossible places. Though what I am I cannot avoid,
Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton,
shall I be revenged on him? for revenged I will be,
Exeunt
From time to time I have acquainted you
Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.
my shin th' other day with playing at sword and
Shall I put him into the basket again?
Mistress Ford: we will thrive, lads, we will thrive.
is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty. I will
Quick, quick! we'll come dress you straight: put
and buck-baskets! Well, I will proclaim myself
men's liking: and yet he would not swear, praised
SCENE IV. A room in DOCTOR CAIUS' house.
of us, I pray!
swearings and starings, pribbles and prabbles?
received from her another embassy of meeting, 'twixt
Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you, follow.
How say you? O, I should remember him: does he not
Exeunt
will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow.
office between you.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
Nay, but he'll be here presently: let's go dress him
way of waste, attempt us again.
Knocks
Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I have
Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you,
What a taking was he in when your husband asked who
I do relent: what would thou more of man?
And mock him home to Windsor.
And did he search for you, and could not find you?
Re-enter PAGE
SCENE V. Another part of the Park.
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.
Exit MISTRESS FORD
turn another into the register of your own, that I
SCENE I. Windsor. Before PAGE's house.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
old man: but I came from her, Master Brook, like a
stones, by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw
laughing-stocks to other men's humours, I desire you
the jealous knave their master in the door, who
hath the jealous fool to her husband! I suspect
Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my
Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
Never.
asked them once or twice what they had in their
Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's gown
Come, trouble not yourself. Good Master Fenton,
so they shall be both bestowed. I have suffered more
Pray you, come near: if I suspect without cause,
my neighbours shall cry aim.
her, child, if she be a whore.
fast enough of themselves, and to call 'horum:' fie upon you!
out of my house yesterday in this basket: why may
Kisses her
Exit
only receive this villanous wrong, but stand under
Nay, follow him, gentlemen, see the issue of his search.
You use me well, Master Ford, do you?
The anchor is deep: will that humour pass?
But, stay, I smell a man of middle-earth.
dogs bark so? be there bears i' the town?
Call him in.
It is not meet the council hear a riot, there is no
Not I, I assure thee: setting the attractions of my
enjoyed nothing of Ford's but his buck-basket, his
him: if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with
be cheater to them both, and they shall be
husband, Master Brook, dwelling in a continual
I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome.
Ay, sir, I'll call them to you.
opinion so easily: she was in his company at Page's
fighter, though now a man of peace.
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
your 'quaes,' and your 'quods,' you must be
numbers. Away I go. They say there is divinity in
Your husband's coming hither, woman, with all the
of company. I think, if your husbands were dead,
Simple of itself, I'll no pullet-sperm in my brewage.
What, John Rugby! I pray thee, go to the casement,
stocks, i' the common stocks, for a witch.
Let me see.
O, what a world of vile ill-favor'd faults
the laundress in Datchet-meat, quickly, come.
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
you shall go, so shall you, Master Page, and you, Sir Hugh.
from Master Slender.
There was, mine host, an old fat woman even now with
O, understand my drift. She dwells so securely on
Why, I will.
walnut for his wife's leman.' Satisfy me once more,
The Windsor bell hath struck twelve, the minute
Beating him
Nym, and Pistol.
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in
SCENE IV. Windsor Park.
at midnight? Fie, fie! he'll never come.
letter: but let thine inherit first, for, I
more said? he is good and fair. Is Sir John
contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel!
Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.
myself acquainted with you. I shall discover a
threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his
I will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have
Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?
I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.
He's welcome.
desire you that we may be friends, and let us knog
We do not act that often jest and laugh,
and I was like to be apprehended for the witch of
with these tidings.
Vell.
with him! better shame than murder.
He is the wiser man, master doctor: he is a curer of
will be known to-night, or never. Be you in the
tameness, civility and patience, to this his
Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.'
cozen-germans that has cozened all the hosts of
Quickly tell me so mush.
Locking the door
He loves your wife, there's the short and the long.
Enter FALSTAFF and MISTRESS QUICKLY
have a coxcomb of frize? 'Tis time I were choked
You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is as
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides and shins.
And not retire: let me have your good will.
you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and
Enter Host and BARDOLPH
Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is
she thanks you a thousand times, and she gives you
You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby. Come,
Come hither.
gentleman of excellent breeding, admirable
From the two parties, forsooth.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
could come to such honour!
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so,
[Aside]  O sweet Anne Page!
I will never mistrust my wife again till thou art
not he be there again? In my house I am sure he is:
conversation, that he dares in this manner assay me?
they did last time.
We'll try that, for I'll appoint my men to carry the
By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no come, he
Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
rightly, is, 'I am Sir John Falstaff's.'
Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
Kindled with unchaste desire,
Prithee, no more prattling, go. I'll hold. This is
Brentford?
Hast thou no suit against my knight, my
the bear loose, are you not?
head: what matter have you against me?
he could not compass.
you tarry here. By gar, I will cut all his two
speak with you, and be acquainted with you, and hath
to thy gait in a semi-circled farthingale. I see
Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old and of
through the town to Frogmore.
genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures as
know Anne's mind for that: never a woman in Windsor
Exeunt Servants
Her father means she shall be all in white,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.
and I profess requital to a hair's breadth, not
Ay, it is no matter.
have her or no.
you hag, you, come down, I say!
Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN
I ha' told them over and over, they lack no
I will do a greater thing than that, upon your
How now, sweetheart! who's at home besides yourself?
Which way should be go? how should I bestow him?
with hope, till the wicked fire of lust have melted
observance, engrossed opportunities to meet her,
Exit
Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I will
Marry, she says that the very same man that
her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of
Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the same
should I say to him? I was then frugal of my
league between my good man and he! Is your wife at
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
You do ill to teach the child such words: he
the fear of God, and not with drunken knaves.
And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look very
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your
To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word
rate, and that hath taught me to say this:
shirts and smocks, socks, foul stockings, greasy
speciously one of them, Mistress Ford, good heart,
were best meddle with buck-washing.
They converse apart
wilful Actaeon, and to these violent proceedings all
SCENE III. A room in the Garter Inn.
Yet be cheerful, knight: thou shalt eat a posset
He is there: see what humour he is in, and I will
You are come to see my daughter Anne?
Why, this is lunatics! this is mad as a mad dog!
Sir John, we have had ill luck, we could never meet.
O, odious is the name!
never come in mine own great chamber again else, of
or staggering take this basket on your shoulders:
gentle, and one that is your friend, I can tell you
And leave your jealousies too, I pray you.
Ay, forsooth, to desire her to--
John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto
man of my kidney,--think of that,--that am as subject
is enough to be the decay of lust and late-walking
have thought this? See the hell of having a false
What, John! Robert! John!
Well, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such
AEsculapius? my Galen? my heart of elder? ha! is
Where had you this pretty weather-cock?
[Aside]  O sweet Anne Page!
I'll warrant they'll have him publicly shamed: and
The clock gives me my cue, and my assurance bids me
Well said, brazen-face! hold it out. Come forth, sirrah!
Mistress Ford, and requests your company.
master: Anne is a good girl, and I wish--
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a-year!
her go through the streets, to know, sir, whether
Falstaff's being here, for I never saw him so gross
to this paltry knight.
Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS QUICKLY, and WILLIAM PAGE
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter,
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Save you, Master Doctor Caius!
does me this wrong. Terms! names! Amaimon sounds
This is my doing, now: 'Nay,' said I, 'will you cast
tap: said I well, bully Hector?
O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with such a
will myself have Anne Page.
Re-enter MISTRESS FORD with two Servants
Sir John Falstaff!
after gift, smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so
Book of Riddles! why, did you not lend it to Alice
Alas the day! good heart, that was not her fault:
sit till you come.
will hack, and so thou shouldst not alter the
I pray you, sir, walk in.
Go fetch me a quart of sack, put a toast in't.
Why, sir, my wife is not young.
Re-enter MISTRESS FORD
desires, and fairies will not pinse you.
Well, I promised you a dinner. Come, come, walk in
was ill killed. How doth good Mistress Page?--and I
Enter DOCTOR CAIUS
I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and
And rattles in their hands: upon a sudden,
when I give the watch-'ords, do as I pid you:
is a basket: if he be of any reasonable stature, he
'larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant of our
confidence, and of other wooers.
get an eye-wink of her: I had myself twenty angels
How now, Mephostophilus!
I will marry her, sir, at your request: but if there
O base Hungarian wight! wilt thou the spigot wield?
Re-enter BARDOLPH with sack
Pistol!
cudgel, and twenty pounds of money, which must be
they would have drowned a blind bitch's puppies,
be shamed. What, wife, I say! Come, come forth!
distraction, they conveyed me into a buck-basket.
fright, to be detected with a jealous rotten
Exeunt PAGE, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
What think you? may we, with the warrant of
That will be excellent. I'll go and buy them vizards.
They are all couched in a pit hard by Herne's oak,
than a mischief.
will ensconce your rags, your cat-a-mountain
That is now answered.
declined, Singulariter, nominativo, hic, haec, hoc.
Writes
'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.
as crest-fallen as a dried pear. I never prospered
[To ROBIN]  Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly,
I am half afraid he will have need of washing, so
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
I will, sir.
must give folks leave to prate: what, the good-jer!
Here comes Sir John.
Shall I do any good, thinkest thou? shall I not lose my suit?
cuckold's horns. Master Brook, thou shalt know I
Speak to Mistress Page.
park, and I will teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest
Why?
you had appointed?
I know vat I have to do. Adieu.
The better to denote her to the doctor,
Page, to know if it were my master's fortune to
women in men's apparel, and smell like Bucklersbury
And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a word with you.
'Boarding,' call you it? I'll be sure to keep him
You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?
able to woo her in good English.
there is either liquor in his pate or money in his
Exit FENTON
Are they so? God bless them and make them his servants!
If there be any pody in the house, and in the
No, it is 'lapis:' I pray you, remember in your prain.
hearts, what ado here is to bring you together!
decrease it upon better acquaintance, when we are
sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page,--at
Keep in that mind, I'll deserve it.
been grievously peaten as an old 'oman: methinks
her reputation, her marriage-vow, and a thousand
Sir, I thank you, by yea and no, I do.
one Nym, sir, that beguiled him of a chain, had the
shall never laugh but in that maid's company! But
When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.
musing: but for you--well, go to.
honesty: and, I warrant you, they could never get
what I am: I will now take the lecher, he is at my
He will seek there, on my word. Neither press,
Of Herne the hunter, let us not forget.
Come, Master Shallow, come, son Slender, in.
be in that mind.
We burn daylight: here, read, read, perceive how I
Whither go you, George? Hark you.
Exeunt
methinks there would be no period to the jest,
pence apiece of Yead Miller, by these gloves.
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Tut, a pin! this shall be answered.
yards about, but I am now about no waste, I am about
period of my ambition: O this blessed hour!
pray heartily, pardon me.
Nay, I must tell you, so you do, or else I could not
and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
he so takes on yonder with my husband, so rails
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
A thousand irreligious cursed hours,
Ay, sir.
take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the court.
Nay, pray you, lead the way.
I think my husband hath some special suspicion of
Ay, that I will, come cut and long-tail, under the
Even to my wish: I have a letter from her
woman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature, that
What are they? let us know.
I will hear you, Master Fenton, and I will at the
swears he'll turn me away.
approach, and, in her invention and Ford's wife's
In love the heavens themselves do guide the state,
I shall find you anon.
venturing.
Why, does he talk of him?
terms of my honour precise: I, I, I myself
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
To take her by the hand and bid her go,
abstract for the remembrance of such places, and
Why, this is the very same, the very hand, the very
myself, fidelicet myself, and the three party is,
Like urchins, ouphes and fairies, green and white,
reasonable demands.
Enter FALSTAFF
me: I'll tell you strange things of this knave
I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.
Mistress Ford, come, Mistress Ford,--
Exeunt
to sea again. Let's be revenged on him: let's
Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a secure and
sport anon: follow me, gentlemen.
Yes, indeed, does he.
and of the season too, it shall appear.
He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor,
By gar, nor I too: there is no bodies.
lose my doctor? no, he gives me the potions and the
To the laundress, forsooth.
dream. Here, here, here be my keys: ascend my
another letter to her: she bears the purse too, she
What cause of suspicion! Out pon you! how am I
churchmen, Master Page, we have some salt of our
thank thee. Let them say 'tis grossly done, so it be
Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in
Made promise to the doctor. Now, thus it rests:
Enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN
Fenton had her, I will do what I can for them all
Exeunt
too. Run up, Sir John.
mark the sequel, Master Brook: I suffered the pangs
Falstaff's a knave, a cuckoldly knave, here are his
Give my sweet Nan this ring: there's for thy pains.
hath, at a word, he hath, believe me: Robert
Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish: I would
Why, what have you to do whither they bear it? You
motions: if it be my luck, so, if not, happy man be
deceived you both, I have directed you to wrong
Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff there?
Thine own true knight,
Well, I do then, yet I say I could show you to the
should end it.
not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my
shalt woo her. Cried I aim? said I well?
Shall we send that foolish carrion, Mistress
Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have
O well-a-day, Mistress Ford! having an honest man
to the deanery, and dispatch it quickly. Go before
shall be with her between ten and eleven, for at
Where fires thou find'st unraked and hearths unswept,
fortune-telling. She works by charms, by spells,
Any thing.
that my husband saw this letter! it would give
content. Here is a letter will say somewhat. Good
last time he searched for him, in a basket, protests
Ay, forsooth.
Come, come, take it up.
Very well, sir, proceed.
my purse, I am yet thy debtor. Boy, go along with
The council shall bear it, it is a riot.
brought to pass under the profession of
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth do what thou wilt,
'Oman, forbear.
Truly, I thought there had been one number more,
Give fire: she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!
she does so take on with her men, they mistook their erection.
Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you should
make an end of my dinner, there's pippins and cheese to come.
Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance of you.
Falstaff will learn the humour of the age,
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap:
be a jewel that I have purchased at an infinite
pills to cool the reins. Call her in.
my counterfeiting the action of an old woman,
is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas
I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?
I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.
Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.
the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the
go into this closet: he will not stay long.
I'll prat her.
and hose. I'll go hide me.
guides him should aid him, I will search
to breakfast: after, we'll a-birding together, I
Sure he is by this, or will be presently: but,
Help to search my house this one time. If I find
least keep your counsel.
Enter MISTRESS PAGE, with a letter
Heaven forgive our sins
would desires to be acquainted withal.
she-Mercury.
small like a woman.
Re-enter ANNE PAGE
coach-fellow Nym, or else you had looked through
Sir, will you hear me?
Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.
house, and what they made there, I know not. Well,
have sufferd all this. My suit then is desperate,
If it be confessed, it is not redress'd: is not that
That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot,
With eggs, sir?
is: and there's her thrummed hat and her muffler
Than thee with wantonness: now doth thy honour stand
Who's there, I trow! Come near the house, I pray you.
at his dog:
no-verbs. Give me thy hand, terrestrial, so. Give me
plucked geese, played truant and whipped top, I knew
Re-enter SIMPLE
'Tis not so, I hope.
Well said, fairy Hugh.
And what says she, I pray, sir?
Exit
Want no money, Sir John, you shall want none.
I do believe the swearer. What with me?
Fery goot: I will make a prief of it in my note-
An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant
Come, gentle Master Slender, come, we stay for you.
thefts were too open, his filching was like an
eight o'clock, to have amends.
guest-cavaleire?
discourse, of great admittance, authentic in your
jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money, for the
barrow of butcher's offal, and to be thrown in the
of so much money, be now a gainer? Good body, I
This punk is one of Cupid's carriers:
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS, disguised as before, PISTOL,  as Hobgoblin, MISTRESS QUICKLY, ANNE PAGE, and others, as Fairies, with tapers
endanger my soul gratis? At a word, hang no more
there's something extraordinary in thee. Come, I
should have swinged me. If I did not think it had
Master Fenton:' this is my doing.
Well, fare you well: we shall have the freer wooing
he would put us two. I had rather be a giantess,
Exit BARDOLPH
unweighed behavior hath this Flemish drunkard
Exeunt SHALLOW, and SLENDER
Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
Accusativo, hinc.
the Park: I pray you, pardon me, I will hereafter
with pistols, that none shall issue out, otherwise
That's meat and drink to me, now. I have seen
my daughter: but 'tis no matter, better a little
him, good heart.
day find it.
I pray you, have your remembrance, child,
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!
have a fine hawk for the bush. Shall it be so?
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
on him? I think the best way were to entertain him
he says is here now in the house by your consent, to
Marry, is it, the very point of it, to Mistress Anne Page.
drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.
And he my husband best of all affects.
What made me love thee? let that persuade thee
own appointment, even as you came in to me, her
Master Brook, that you have cozened of money, to
--send him by your two men to Datchet-mead.
Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, SLENDER, Host, SIR HUGH EVANS, DOCTOR CAIUS, and RUGBY
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
Lies down and sleeps
The king doth keep his revels here to-night:
Exeunt Pyramus and Thisbe
Which she must dote on in extremity.
But stay, O spite!
I am, my lord, as well derived as he,
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of
Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her joy:
To fit your fancies to your father's will,
As well possess'd, my love is more than his,
latter end of a play, before the duke:
Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord!
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
There is not one word apt, one player fitted:
And made your other love, Demetrius,
if our sport had gone forward, we had all been made
Not so, neither: but if I had wit enough to get out
Here is my bed: sleep give thee all his rest!
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
And never, since the middle summer's spring,
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
Re-enter PUCK
I'll put a girdle round about the earth
And now I have the boy, I will undo
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword,
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
The course of true love never did run smooth,
I evermore did love you, Hermia,
And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
Yes, it doth shine that night.
And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,
So methinks:
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master
Thou runn'st before me, shifting every place,
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
And I.
And the Athenian woman by his side:
When I had at my pleasure taunted her
Re-enter PUCK
I swear to thee, by Cupid's strongest bow,
Her brother's noontide with Antipodes.
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face. Thisby!
By their increase, now knows not which is which:
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
I will, my Hermia.
An if I could, what should I get therefore?
But, either it was different in blood,--
He is no crescent, and his horns are
And yet a place of high respect with me,--
By his best arrow with the golden head,
What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
Song and dance
yourself too much in the action, mounsieur, and,
A foolish heart, that I leave here behind.
I'll whip thee with a rod: he is defiled
It is, my lord.
Exeunt QUINCE, SNUG, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING
Do I entice you? do I speak you fair?
Away with us to Athens, three and three,
thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
of our company?
Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and Attendants
We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,
And each several chamber bless,
So awake when I am gone,
I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's have
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top,
I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
entreat you,--not to fear, not to tremble: my life
O hell! to choose love by another's eyes.
Come, blade, my breast imbrue:
Fetch me that flower, the herb I shew'd thee once:
[Awaking]  What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?
Lysander's love, that would not let him bide,
You minimus, of hindering knot-grass made,
that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber, for,
He dares not come there for the candle, for, you
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody.
Her silver visage in the watery glass,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
Ere I will my virgin patent up
Am not I Hermia? are not you Lysander?
Come now, what masques, what dances shall we have,
The throstle with his note so true,
And pluck the wings from Painted butterflies
And interchanged love-tokens with my child:
I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.
To do observance to a morn of May,
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
In number more than ever women spoke,
And follow you no further: let me go:
Sickness is catching: O, were favour so,
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,
Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
Sleep sound:
Cobweb: if I cut my finger, I shall make bold with
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
Another moon: but, O, methinks, how slow
excuse. Never excuse, for when the players are all
And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage queen,
I say I love thee more than he can do.
With this same play, against your nuptial.
That we are awake? It seems to me
Enter Thisbe
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face,
Despised in nativity,
Lie further off, in human modesty,
the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek,
company, and our devices known. In the meantime I
Hop as light as bird from brier,
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
That I can match her.
His speech, was like a tangled chain, nothing
ACT IV
[Awaking]  O Helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
and lady dear!'
Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no.
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
To-morrow truly will I meet with thee.
Have you sent to Bottom's house ? is he come home yet?
But with good will. To show our simple skill,
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear:
In her behalf that scorns your services.
And here am I, and wode within this wood,
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind,
Helen, it is not so.
I would my father look'd but with my eyes.
That I sleeping here was found
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.
In this same interlude it doth befall
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
Now are frolic: not a mouse
Because she is something lower than myself,
If ever I thy face by daylight see:
eyes, I will move storms, I will condole in some
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Steal me awhile from mine own company.
Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
Or as tie heresies that men do leave
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
That frights the maidens of the villagery,
And the blots of Nature's hand
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Love's stories written in love's richest book.
own fool's eyes peep.
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Here, Peter Quince.
What worser place can I beg in your love,--
make me afeard.
Tie up my love's tongue bring him silently.
The will of man is by his reason sway'd,
Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed. Pray you,
I do but beg a little changeling boy,
Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? speak,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal:
Tongue, not a word:
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
You must say 'paragon:' a paramour is, God bless us,
The actors are at hand and by their show
I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy,
Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
But we are spirits of another sort:
there is two or three lords and ladies more married:
Accompany your hearts!
You are unkind, Demetrius, be not so,
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.
Let me have Hermia's: do you marry him.
But speak, Egeus, is not this the day
dead, there needs none to be blamed. Marry, if he
When every thing seems double.
nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath, and I
You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear
he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye
have some plaster, or some loam, or some rough-cast
A calendar, a calendar! look in the almanac, find
You spotted snakes with double tongue,
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.
Thisne,' 'Ah, Pyramus, lover dear! thy Thisby dear,
Swifter than the wandering moon.
To hear the sea-maid's music.
And make him with fair AEgle break his faith,
to a point.
So shall all the couples three
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
I will hear that play,
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?
As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power,--
When his love he doth espy,
This old moon wanes! she lingers my desires,
The fairy land buys not the child of me.
What thou seest when thou dost wake,
Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
That I am that same wall, the truth is so:
No, no, you must play Pyramus: and, Flute, you Thisby.
of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.
ladies out of their wits, they would have no more
For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence!
Exeunt
The wren with little quill,--
A dance
Then let us teach our trial patience,
To death, or to a vow of single life.
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent!
This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
And the youth, mistook by me,
is no man can tell what. Methought I was,--and
Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a
fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus
Enter PUCK
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
The sun was not so true unto the day
Demetrius and Egeus, go along:
I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
Because that she as her attendant hath
Enter QUINCE for the Prologue
I will not stay thy questions, let me go:
good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your
Re-enter PUCK, and BOTTOM with an ass's head
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres,
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes,
Peter Quince! Flute, the bellows-mender! Snout,
pumps, meet presently at the palace, every man look
And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
I do estate unto Demetrius.
Grows, lives and dies in single blessedness.
[Reads]  'The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
Exit
Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase,
Things growing are not ripe until their season
Henceforth be never number'd among men!
This man hath my consent to marry her.
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
Our queen and all our elves come here anon.
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense:
There is no following her in this fierce vein:
Farewell, sweet playfellow: pray thou for us,
To dew her orbs upon the green.
What are they that do play it?
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams,
We cannot fight for love, as men may do,
Enter OBERON
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
Of thy former lady's eye:
Your eyes are lode-stars, and your tongue's sweet air
about him, to signify wall, and let him hold his
I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
Merry and tragical! tedious and brief!
Sweet love,--
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,
Though I alone do feel the injury.
devoured many a gentleman of your house: I promise
chamber window, where we play, open, and the moon
And those things do best please me
And darest not stand, nor look me in the face.
With the rich worth of your virginity.
Long withering out a young man revenue.
And Robin shall restore amends.
But he hath chid me hence and threaten'd me
Come our lovely lady nigh,
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.
town, by moonlight, there will we rehearse, for if
Say, what abridgement have you for this evening?
Presenteth Moonshine, for, if you will know,
But all the story of the night told over,
It stands as an edict in destiny:
Call'd Robin Goodfellow: are not you he
For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe:
The rite of May, and hearing our intent,
These couples shall eternally be knit:
I do wander everywhere,
Make choice of which your highness will see first.
O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his
I jest to Oberon and make him smile
She will find him by starlight. Here she comes, and
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
Exit
Lies down and sleeps
Pyramus, you begin: when you have spoken your
Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.
No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
man as other men are,' and there indeed let him name
We may effect this business yet ere day.
Scornful Lysander! true, he hath my love,
By the triple Hecate's team,
Stand aside: the noise they make
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart,
You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?
I swear by that which I will lose for thee,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
Not Hermia but Helena I love:
Why are you grown so rude? what change is this?
To follow me and praise my eyes and face?
You of your wife and me of my consent,
To wear away this long age of three hours
But fare ye well: 'tis partly my own fault,
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
How shall we find the concord of this discord?
for that: and yet, to say the truth, reason and
Half sleep, half waking: but as yet, I swear,
Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?
In thy eye that shall appear
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again:
If not with vantage, as Demetrius',
Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three
Every fairy take his gait,
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
Yea, art thou there?
How long within this wood intend you stay?
Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern
I trust to take of truest Thisby sight.
Reads
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
And thus she means, videlicet:--
see, it is already in snuff.
Come from the farthest Steppe of India?
For you in my respect are all the world:
A fortnight hold we this solemnity,
in Thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine
If so, my eyes are oftener wash'd than hers.
And I do love thee: therefore, go with me,
With this field-dew consecrate,
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
Sing, and dance it trippingly.
If you we re civil and knew courtesy,
Enter DEMETRIUS, HELENA, following him
Upon faint primrose-beds were wont to lie,
To die upon the hand I love so well.
Hit with Cupid's archery,
Ay, and Wall too.
Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste:
With a disdainful youth: anoint his eyes,
We will make amends ere long,
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
Where I did meet thee once with Helena,
Then to your offices and let me rest.
With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd!
You see how simple and how fond I am.
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex:
He should have worn the horns on his head.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
honey-bag, signior. Where's Mounsieur Mustardseed?
No night is now with hymn or carol blest:
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
'Little' again! nothing but 'low' and 'little'!
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve:
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
The dove pursues the griffin, the mild hind
Creep into acorn-cups and hide them there.
With Demetrius.
perfect yellow.
Take time to pause, and, by the nest new moon--
Exeunt THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, EGEUS, and train
Look, when I vow, I weep, and vows so born,
To live a barren sister all your life,
I love not to see wretchedness o'er charged
And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind:
O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!
How can it be?
This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein, a lover is
Here she comes, curst and sad:
Exit HERMIA
But by some power it is,--my love to Hermia,
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
I go, I go, look how I go,
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain,
Never so weary, never so in woe,
The foolish Fates.
Enter OBERON and TITANIA with their train
Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves: to
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
In remembrance of a shroud.
Did scare away, or rather did affright,
to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream
And I.
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Came here in grace our solemnity.
These yellow cowslip cheeks,
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
back and finds her lover?
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
Exit
And Hippolyta.
Exeunt Prologue, Thisbe, Lion, and Moonshine
discretion but to hang us: but I will aggravate my
translated.
So quick bright things come to confusion.
Exeunt
Out, dog! out, cur! thou drivest me past the bounds
By him imprinted and within his power
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
Come, trusty sword,
Anon his Thisbe must be answered,
Methought I was enamour'd of an ass.
That's all one: you shall play it in a mask, and
And then end life when I end loyalty!
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray,
To bait me with this foul derision?
spy her through the wall. You shall see, it will
To seek new friends and stranger companies.
Could ever hear by tale or history,
So please your grace, the Prologue is address'd.
Speak, Pyramus. Thisby, stand forth.
Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke!
mounsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret
it: if I do it, let the audience look to their
Now the wasted brands do glow,
Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING
With feigning voice verses of feigning love,
To the best bride-bed will we,
Do you not jest?
Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
A local habitation and a name.
From these that my poor company detest:
Never so little show of love to her,
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
Enter LYSANDER and HERMIA
ACT V
All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence?
And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,
To prove him false that says I love thee not.
I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot!
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
When all the world is here to look on me?
methought I had,--but man is but a patched fool, if
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
Re-enter QUINCE
Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
Follow my voice: we'll try no manhood here.
And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls,
Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand he goes
Thorough flood, thorough fire,
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes:
men.
Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
To your eye,
I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.
Exit
And left sweet Pyramus translated there:
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
O night, which ever art when day is not!
Is true as steel: leave you your power to draw,
Give me your hands, if we be friends,
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd,
Where heart doth hop:
His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
I will discharge it in either your straw-colour
O night, O night! alack, alack, alack,
I would be loath to have you overflown with a
To honour Helen and to be her knight!
be, give it me, for I am slow of study.
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
good mounsieur, have a care the honey-bag break not,
For parting us,--O, is it all forgot?
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
And I.
And in the wood, where often you and I
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
Are we all met?
Exit
Sing in our sweet lullaby,
No? then I well perceive you all not nigh
How now, spirit! whither wander you?
For beasts that meet me run away for fear:
For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
chamber, for Pyramus and Thisby says the story, did
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Will we sing, and bless this place.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
At a fair vestal throned by the west,
Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
Tell me how it came this night
My good Lysander!
Come hither: I am here.
He goes before me and still dares me on:
And then I will her charmed eye release
And are you grown so high in his esteem,
a bird? who would give a bird the lie, though he cry
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision,
Take not her part, for, if thou dost intend
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse,
All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer,
And will for evermore be true to it.
And when she drinks, against her lips I bob
And the ill counsel of a desert place
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
Be certain, nothing truer, 'tis no jest
SCENE I. The same. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA
Re-enter LYSANDER
Lamenting some enforced chastity.
never tire.
But yet an union in partition,
Than that which withering on the virgin thorn
Then, what it was that next came in her eye,
To trust the opportunity of night
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
You can endure the livery of a nun,
You both are rivals, and love Hermia,
Contagious fogs, which falling in the land
Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier:
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
For never anything can be amiss,
To set against me for your merriment:
For everlasting bond of fellowship--
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts,
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
speech, enter into that brake: and so every one
that same cowardly, giant-like ox-beef hath
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Exeunt
Then I must be thy lady: but I know
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind,
And 'tailor' cries, and falls into a cough,
Exit
I will be with thee straight.
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.
Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well:
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.
wild-fowl than your lion living, and we ought to
Seeking sweet favours from this hateful fool,
Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear:
Throttle their practised accent in their fears
Out of this wood do not desire to go:
Exeunt
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
the tinker! Starveling! God's my life, stolen
Turn melancholy forth to funerals,
[Awaking]  When my cue comes, call me, and I will
Since night you loved me, yet since night you left
The poet's eye, in fine frenzy rolling,
Then how can it be said I am alone,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
O dainty duck! O dear!
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
Now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right,
from this place, do what they can: I will walk up
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Nay, good Lysander, for my sake, my dear,
He will not know what all but he do know:
Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome,
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
leave your courtesy, good mounsieur.
And this, Lysander, this Demetrius is,
Peter Quince,--
Had been incorporate. So we grow together,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
That is the true beginning of our end.
When they next wake, all this derision
And in the wood, a league without the town,
In himself he is,
Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
Already to their wormy beds are gone,
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.
Exit
And come, Egeus, you shall go with me,
Did whisper often very secretly.
O, that a lady, of one man refused.
To have my love to bed and to arise,
And you sat smiling at his cruel pray.
Not so, my lord, for his valour cannot carry his
For I must now to Oberon.
It is not night when I do see your face,
When simpleness and duty tender it.
There to remain.
Exit
And duty in his service perishing.
Come, Hippolyta.
Mine own, and not mine own.
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all
nightingale.
Then, my queen, in silence sad,
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.
This loam, this rough-cast and this stone doth show
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occasion.
Call you me fair? that fair again unsay.
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
Nay, go not back.
out of fear.
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
But I beseech your grace that I may know
Marry, our play is, The most lamentable comedy, and
Crook-knee'd, and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls,
Stabs himself
Thou see'st these lovers seek a place to fight:
lovers speak of.
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
you your kindred had made my eyes water ere now. I
O monstrous! O strange! we are haunted. Pray,
Why, all these should be in the lanthorn, for all
I must go seek some dewdrops here
As I can take it with another herb,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
As one come not within another's way.
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep:
vision. I have had a dream, past the wit of man to
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your
And it is nothing, nothing in the world,
Exit LYSANDER, as following the voice
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
This cherry nose,
Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.
Of great revenue, and she hath no child:
Some man or other must present Wall: and let him
The duke was here, and bid us follow him?
And therefore is Love said to be a child,
I then did ask of her her changeling child,
his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.
Helena, adieu:
It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
The pale companion is not for our pomp.
prove an ass.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.
Hath such force and blessed power.
But Athenian found I none,
And he did bid us follow to the temple.
Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I,
I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee,
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape,
Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
How easy is a bush supposed a bear!
I am not afraid.
A good persuasion: therefore, hear me, Hermia.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
Now the hungry lion roars,
Go, Philostrate,
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die,
You, Pyramus' father: myself, Thisby's father:
Must I speak now?
And I serve the fairy queen,
Made mine eyes water, but more merry tears
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
How now, my love! why is your cheek so pale?
Either to die the death or to abjure
Due but to one and crowned with one crest.
Wake when some vile thing is near.
Never mole, hare lip, nor scar,
Exeunt all but LYSANDER and HERMIA
I am sent with broom before,
Hail, mortal!
You thief of love! what, have you come by night
To take from thence all error with his might,
For I am sick when I do look on thee.
Makes speed to catch the tiger, bootless speed,
O Sisters Three,
My love, my life my soul, fair Helena!
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear
Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?
Dies
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me,
play is preferred. In any case, let Thisby have
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears
Draws on apace, four happy days bring in
Odours, odours.
Enter SNUG
Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain,
Abide me, if thou darest, for well I wot
O Pyramus, arise!
epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between two
Beg of her for remedy.
Those that Hobgoblin call you and sweet Puck,
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him.
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
Like to a step-dame or a dowager
From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.
I am a right maid for my cowardice:
Enter HERMIA and DEMETRIUS
I will lead them up and down:
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
sucking dove, I will roar you an 'twere any
That is, hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
Lay them in gore,
You have her father's love, Demetrius,
And see our moonlight revels, go with us,
Go, bring them in: and take your places, ladies.
For aye to be in shady cloister mew'd,
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
The jaws of darkness do devour it up:
Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day.
See'st thou this sweet sight?
most dreadful thing, for there is not a more fearful
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
Exit
For you love Hermia, this you know I know:
Enough, enough, my lord, you have enough:
will draw a bill of properties, such as our play
Relent, sweet Hermia: and, Lysander, yield
It cannot be but thou hast murder'd him,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes,
It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.
Consider then we come but in despite.
Exit PHILOSTRATE
Be it so she, will not here before your grace
The villain is much lighter-heel'd than I:
And then the moon, like to a silver bow
Less than an ace, man, for he is dead, he is nothing.
And so far blameless proves my enterprise,
'Tis strange my Theseus, that these
And on her wither'd dewlap pour the ale.
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon.
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Re-enter HELENA
If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit  down,
Lysander, whereto tends all this?
How came these things to pass?
Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver: this will put them
And the owner of it blest
To whisper. At the which let no man wonder.
Full often hath she gossip'd by my side,
For, if I should as lion come in strife
me:
This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn,
The raging rocks
Thanks, good Egeus: what's the news with thee?
When thou wakest,
but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments,
Ready.
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
By the Athenian garment be had on?
Enter LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HERMIA, and HELENA
Did not you tell me I should know the man
With hands as pale as milk,
Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby:
Gentle lover, remedy.
Over park, over pale,
And dares not answer nay,--
Come, tears, confound,
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth,
I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
To Athens will I bear my folly back
Come, my Hippolyta: what cheer, my love?
Why, then may you leave a casement of the great
O that my prayers could such affection move!
Pyramus is not killed indeed, and, for the more
The finch, the sparrow and the lark,
Shall not in their issue stand,
Re-enter PUCK and DEMETRIUS
And then came Pyramus.
Enter Thisbe
talk through the chink of a wall.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
Titania, music call, and strike more dead
None, but your beauty: would that fault were mine!
You spend your passion on a misprised mood:
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
In their gold coats spots you see,
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away!
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,
Between our statures, she hath urged her height,
And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
To each word a warbling note:
By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,
tyrant: I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to
Through this palace, with sweet peace,
Cupid is a knavish lad,
Sleep his seat on thy eyelid:
It appears, by his small light of discretion, that
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.
And thorough this distemperature we see
[Awaking]  And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
And to speak troth, I have forgot our way:
And this weak and idle theme,
epilogue alone.
May all to Athens back again repair
I do entreat your grace to pardon me.
Ever shall in safety rest.
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
Exit
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
This was lofty! Now name the rest of the players.
This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled
I led them on in this distracted fear,
Philomel, with melody,  and c.
Beetles black, approach not near,
The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.
By day's approach look to be visited.
Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!
Here is the scroll of every man's name, which is
I scorn you not: it seems that you scorn me.
You bead, you acorn.
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
Lysander riddles very prettily:
The lazy time, if not with some delight?
Enter HELENA
Through the house give gathering light,
More fond on her than she upon her love:
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
Ay, by my life,
Have with our needles created both one flower,
I can no further crawl, no further go,
Since you have shore
lanthorn is the moon, I, the man in the moon, this
And the country proverb known,
what, for if I tell you, I am no true Athenian. I
Were met together to rehearse a play
Thy mantle good,
Yet Hermia still loves you: then be content.
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait
this dream: it shall be called Bottom's Dream,
O excellent!
for the goose carries not the fox. It is well:
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
But, like in sickness, did I loathe this food,
I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
You were best to call them generally, man by man,
[Starting up]  No assure you, the wall is down that
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven,
But hark, a voice! stay thou but here awhile,
This hateful imperfection of her eyes:
Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb
And lead these testy rivals so astray
according to his cue.
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,
They would have stolen away, they would, Demetrius,
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
First, rehearse your song by rote
Then, for the third part of a minute, hence,
With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong,
And stolen the impression of her fantasy
Now, until the break of day,
Seem to break loose, take on as you would follow,
Enter PUCK
sweet-faced man, a proper man, as one shall see in a
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears:
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.'
I have forsworn his bed and company.
Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed,
'Ninus' tomb,' man: why, you must not speak that
And hast thou kill'd him sleeping? O brave touch!
Hail!
Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.
is Thisby's cue: she is to enter now, and I am to
From our debate, from our dissension,
Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood,
Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne!
Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Till I torment thee for this injury.
Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to
Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man,
My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
But, being over-full of self-affairs,
Come, thou gentle day!
Eyes, do you see?
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens,
You would not use a gentle lady so,
Shall break the locks
Which is--no, no--which was the fairest dame
Our true intent is. All for your delight
And maidens call it love-in-idleness.
Enter Pyramus
I wonder of their being here together.
Masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Exit
I cannot truly say how I came here,
With a coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers,
More witnesseth than fancy's images
Mustardseed.
Why do they run away? this is a knavery of them to
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so,
This is the woman, but not this the man.
if you pardon, we will mend:
That, he awaking when the other do,
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire,
of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not
The human mortals want their winter here,
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
From off the head of this Athenian swain,
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
on a recorder, a sound, but not in government.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
Are not you he?
Helen, I love thee, by my life, I do:
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part,
Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
Exit
Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells,
And now they never meet in grove or green,
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so,
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Between our after-supper and bed-time?
Or in the beached margent of the sea,
This is thy negligence: still thou mistakest,
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
Well roared, Lion.
Flying between the cold moon and the earth,
Enter LYSANDER and HELENA
paramour for a sweet voice.
Ay, or else one must come in with a bush of thorns
For as a surfeit of the sweetest things
In their nativity all truth appears.
But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
Fear not, my lord, your servant shall do so.
Enter PUCK
That in crossways and floods have burial,
Trip we after the night's shade:
Now thou and I are new in amity,
His mother was a votaress of my order:
these are in the moon. But, silence! here comes Thisbe.
If you were men, as men you are in show,
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me:
No, make it two more, let it be written in eight and eight.
of hay: good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.
you may speak as small as you will.
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes,
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
Far in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,
I with the morning's love have oft made sport,
Flute, you must take Thisby on you.
Whom I do love and will do till my death.
Pat, pat, and here's a marvellous convenient place
The moon methinks looks with a watery eye,
And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
The more I hate, the more he follows me.
bring in--God shield us!--a lion among ladies, is a
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
Lovers, make moan:
Truly, a peck of provender: I could munch your good
Marking the embarked traders on the flood,
But mark, poor knight,
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.
Exit
Exit
Thus to make poor females mad.
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight:
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
present, the person of Moonshine. Then, there is
And the imperial votaress passed on,
Or to her death, according to our law
Adieu, adieu, adieu.
What thought I be not so in grace as you,
As much as we this night have overwatch'd.
From Perigenia, whom he ravished?
A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king,
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
And ere a man hath power to say 'Behold!'
Lovers, to bed, 'tis almost fairy time.
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong,
Thisbe, is the better, he for a man, God warrant us,
By some illusion see thou bring her here:
And bless it to all fair prosperity:
Jack shall have Jill,
Exeunt Fairies. TITANIA sleeps
O, once tell true, tell true, even for my sake!
A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal,
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt:
So, good night unto you all.
and that were enough to hang us all.
Do, as a monster fly my presence thus.
Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
While these visions did appear.
Well run, Thisbe.
Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard,
Tom Snout, the tinker.
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.
clean linen, and let not him that plays the lion
he is in the wane, but yet, in courtesy, in all
thus strong,
were pity of my life: no I am no such thing, I am a
If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine.
From the presence of the sun,
Reads
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
A very gentle beast, of a good conscience.
Snug, the joiner, you, the lion's part: and, I
Where art thou now?
Lies down
Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight,
And his love Thisbe, very tragical mirth.'
Are of imagination all compact:
comedy. No more words: away! go, away!
Helena is here at hand,
Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love,
A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which
So that but one heart we can make of it,
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged himself
Ay me, for pity! what a dream was here!
O,--As true as truest horse, that yet would
Cobweb.
Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet,--
They willfully themselves exile from light
And won thy love, doing thee injuries,
Let her shine as gloriously
Nay, faith, let me not play a woman, I have a beard coming.
things catch.
voice so that I will roar you as gently as any
The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.
These are the forgeries of jealousy:
But in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
When thou wakest, it is thy dear:
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd,
I'll follow you, I'll lead you about a round,
Love takes the meaning in love's conference.
part at once, cues and all Pyramus enter: your cue
her passion ends the play.
Ay, that left pap,
And, like a forester, the groves may tread,
The lunatic, the lover and the poet
Therefore I think I am not in the night,
That rheumatic diseases do abound:
Re-enter HERMIA
out moonshine, find out moonshine.
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Yea and the best person too, and he is a very
See as thou wast wont to see:
Are gone, are gone:
And, all my powers, address your love and might
Against our nuptial and confer with you
Let me come to her.
And grows to something of great constancy,
SCENE II. Athens. QUINCE'S house.
If then true lovers have been ever cross'd,
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,
The worst that may befall me in this case,
That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell!
Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing
May through the centre creep and so displease
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
At whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there,
Hence, away! now all is well:
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat:
Give me that boy, and I will go with thee.
because it hath no bottom, and I will sing it in the
answer: my next is, 'Most fair Pyramus.' Heigh-ho!
More strange than true: I never may believe
This man is Pyramus, if you would know,
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
Weaving spiders, come not here,
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Peaseblossom.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
They sleep
Gentles, do not reprehend:
O Bottom, thou art changed! what do I see on thee?
One heart, one bed, two bosoms and one troth.
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,
Come not near our fairy queen.
But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes
will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show,
What love could press Lysander from my side?
Exeunt
One aloof stand sentinel.
For ever the society of men.
I wonder if the lion be to speak.
To do you service.
So should the murder'd look, and so should I,
Do you amend it then, it lies in you:
This whole earth may be bored and that the moon
O weary night, O long and tedious night,
You shall know all that you are like to know.
What, a play toward! I'll be an auditor,
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
humble-bee on the top of a thistle, and, good
discourse, my lord.
cannot abide. How answer you that?
Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,
Re-enter LYSANDER
Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best
Myself the man i' the moon do seem to be.
And the issue there create
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
Swifter than the moon's sphere,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
I mean, that my heart unto yours is knit
No die, but an ace, for him, for he is but one.
That I do hate thee and love Helena.
Should of another therefore be abused!
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child,
He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is
We are their parents and original.
And she is mine, and all my right of her
Well, proceed.
That is, the madman: the lover, all as frantic,
You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus is a
[Sings]
Which never labour'd in their minds till now,
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes,
Re-enter SNOUT
Tarry, rash wanton: am not I thy lord?
What is Pyramus? a lover, or a tyrant?
Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear.
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green
Which is as brief as I have known a play,
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch,
Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia:
There will I stay for thee.
I would I had your bond, for I perceive
She never had so sweet a changeling,
On whose eyes I might approve
And kill me too.
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
Why, then, we are awake: let's follow him
To give their bed joy and prosperity.
How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes
themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here
Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew,
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
And what is mine my love shall render him.
If we shadows have offended,
By all the vows that ever men have broke,
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly:
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
Now she holds me not,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.
The next thing then she waking looks upon,
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep,
And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
SCENE II. Athens. QUINCE'S house.
Up and down, up and down,
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!
So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt.
Exit
What say you, Hermia? be advised fair maid:
Exeunt OBERON, TITANIA, and train
Pyramus draws near the wall: silence!
Lie further off yet, do not lie so near.
enough to speak, but to speak true.
And stolen my love's heart from him?
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
But who comes here? I am invisible,
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
As he to me: would he have stolen away
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay.
Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?
Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night,
discharged. But come, your Bergomask: let your
Mine ear is much enamour'd of thy note,
And now do I bethink me, so it is,--
Exit DEMETRIUS
May be the lady: thou shalt know the man
My soul is in the sky:
Puppet? why so? ay, that way goes the game.
Fairy king, attend, and mark:
And tarry for the comfort of the day.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight:
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
What, with Lysander?
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia:
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit,
When thou wakest, if she be by,
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
Pardon, my lord.
You speak not as you think: it cannot be.
It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
wedding-day at night.
So I, admiring of his qualities:
Flourish of trumpets
I fear it, I promise you.
'The thrice three Muses mourning for the death
But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
Exit
Come, my lord, and in our flight
I have a widow aunt, a dowager
for yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it
Which makes it tedious, for in all the play
Exit PHILOSTRATE
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
We are not here. That you should here repent you,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?
Call Philostrate.
Since once I sat upon a promontory,
Have you the lion's part written? pray you, if it
Methought a serpent eat my heart away,
yet, that you answer to Pyramus: you speak all your
to fright me, if they could. But I will not stir
With pomp, with triumph and with revelling.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
do not doubt but to hear them say, it is a sweet
And though she be but little, she is fierce.
Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up:
Now is the mural down between the two neighbours.
Where's Peaseblossom?
'cuckoo' never so?
I did upbraid her and fall out with her,
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
And so the lion vanished.
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye,
By the dead and drowsy fire:
Giving a paper
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met:
She shall pursue it with the soul of love:
When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear
Nor longer stay in your curst company.
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too:
Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
Ever true in loving be,
Over hill, over dale,
So far be distant, and, good night, sweet friend:
The passion of loud laughter never shed.
To sweep the dust behind the door.
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood,
The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
Out, sword, and wound
O me! you juggler! you canker-blossom!
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant,
Thisbe runs off
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts,
The starry welkin cover thou anon
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgement taste,
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
Of prison gates,
do any man's heart good to hear me, I will roar,
Not a whit: I have a device to make all well.
My legs are longer though, to run away.
And ere I take this charm from off her sight,
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty:
The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?
Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and
Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, Lords and Attendants
fall pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.
Enter BOTTOM
And here will rest me.
Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER's eyes
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come
Through the forest have I gone.
I follow'd fast, but faster he did fly,
For lack of tread are undistinguishable:
And Phibbus' car
Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not
Exeunt
About the wood go swifter than the wind,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
the duke hath dined. Get your apparel together,
When cowardice pursues and valour flies.
Which by us shall blessed be,
Indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child
Egeus, I will overbear your will,
And we fairies, that do run
And with her personage, her tall personage,
I grant you, friends, if that you should fright the
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
I will not trust you, I,
beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain
may shine in at the casement.
Those be rubies, fairy favours,
Fairies, begone, and be all ways away.
Music, still
Sleeps
To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
sing it at her death.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
Exit
Than common sleep of all these five the sense.
To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes
Upon that day either prepare to die
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
An you should do it too terribly, you would fright
We'll none of that: that have I told my love,
And by and by I will to thee appear.
In forty minutes.
Robin Starveling, the tailor.
And I am sick when I look not on you.
From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.
for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our
mother, and to Master Peascod, your father. Good
But, howsoever, strange and admirable.
and Thisby whisper.
And now have toil'd their unbreathed memories
God speed fair Helena! whither away?
With orange-tawny bill,
No more yielding but a dream,
SCENE I. The wood. TITANIA lying asleep.
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman,
And even for that do I love you the more.
Meet me all by break of day.
No epilogue, I pray you, for your play needs no
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself.
O, teach me how you look, and with what art
That draws a sword on thee.
Either death or you I'll find immediately.
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
I must confess that I have heard so much,
When I did him at this advantage take,
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
Or, if thou follow me, do not believe
Set your heart at rest:
How canst thou thus for shame, Titania,
With shears his thread of silk.
Do it for thy true-love take,
Exit
Two bosoms interchained with an oath,
With these mortals on the ground.
No, in truth, sir, he should not. 'Deceiving me'
Enter OBERON and squeezes the flower on TITANIA's eyelids
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
An ass's nole I fixed on his head:
Exit TITANIA with her train
you. Your name, honest gentleman?
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:
He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine,
pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
And here, with all good will, with all my heart,
[Roaring]  Oh--
Fare thee well, nymph: ere he do leave this grove,
O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Nought shall go ill,
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
Lysander if you live, good sir, awake.
Exit
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
go near to make a man look sad.
And won her soul, and she, sweet lady, dotes,
And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
Go, one of you, find out the forester,
I remember.
Proceed, Moon.
The ousel cock so black of hue,
I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
And this same progeny of evils comes
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby,
Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth,
Thou shalt aby it.
therefore you must needs play Pyramus.
But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport.
Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
Get you gone, you dwarf,
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
What, dead, my dove?
The childing autumn, angry winter, change
masters! fly, masters! Help!
O spite! too old to be engaged to young.
Ay, there it is.
more the pity that some honest neighbours will not
For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne,
Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
Enter Pyramus and Thisbe, Wall, Moonshine, and Lion
On the ground
This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would
I am fear'd in field and town:
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
To have his sight thither and back again.
I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back
How happy some o'er other some can be!
Cupid all arm'd: a certain aim he took
That hatred is so far from jealousy,
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
How now, mad spirit!
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song,
Pursue her, and for this intelligence
You do their work, and they shall have good luck:
Now am I fled,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in:
On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape,
Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess,
But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me: I
discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
Here comes one.
As true as truest horse that yet would never tire,
hope, here is a play fitted.
Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed,
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
Whose note full many a man doth mark,
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!
about to expound this dream. Methought I was--there
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
thorn-bush, my thorn-bush, and this dog, my dog.
Sweet, do not scorn her so.
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememberest
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy
Horns winded within
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must
Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats, messengers
Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
Farewell, thou lob of spirits, I'll be gone:
Abate thy hour! Shine comforts from the east,
written in eight and six.
Approach, ye Furies fell!
Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother.
Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?
Lies down and sleeps
If we have unearned luck
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
Thou told'st me they were stolen unto this wood,
Thus Thisby ends:
Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen,
To fetch me trifles, and return again,
The rest I'd give to be to you translated.
What, stain'd with blood!
It comprehends some bringer of that joy,
Of my consent that she should be your wife.
I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
I am your spaniel, and, Demetrius,
Despised the Athenian maid,
Pleading for a lover's fee.
The more I love, the more he hateth me.
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
Are hated most of those they did deceive,
He says they can do nothing in this kind.
My love thou art, my love I think.
How low am I? I am not yet so low
That you should think, we come not to offend,
Out, loathed medicine! hated potion, hence!
Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell:
That if it would but apprehend some joy,
Have every pelting river made so proud
Exeunt
I took him sleeping,--that is finish'd too,--
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world,
Now am I dead,
SCENE I. A wood near Athens.
I understand not what you mean by this.
What is Thisby? a wandering knight?
Silence awhile. Robin, take off this head.
But I will wed thee in another key,
Each under each. A cry more tuneable
Troop home to churchyards: damned spirits all,
Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal.
That I did never, no, nor never can,
To her he hates? and wherefore doth Lysander
Is all our company here?
Ready.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee,
better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not
It is not for you: I have heard it over,
Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace,
This Helena, old Nedar's Helena:
He follow'd you, for love I follow'd him,
That the rude sea grew civil at her song
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive
To leave the figure or disfigure it.
Let her not hurt me: I was never curst,
And make and mar
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Injurious Hermia! most ungrateful maid!
Reads
--odours savours sweet:
In the church-way paths to glide:
We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.
Thou takest
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt, he knows
with cheer.
is past, it is, 'never tire.'
Shall upon their children be.
In nightly revels and new jollity.
And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night.
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Which shall be either to this gentleman
My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd,
Or on Diana's altar to protest
With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover, and
SCENE II. Another part of the wood.
Re-enter Thisbe
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow,
May now perchance both quake and tremble here,
good grace.
To stubborn harshness: and, my gracious duke,
methinks I am marvellous hairy about the face, and I
But miserable most, to love unloved?
stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house, and we
I beg the law, the law, upon his head.
I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain
As she is mine, I may dispose of her:
look to 't.
We do not come as minding to contest you,
When thou hold'st up thy hand: O, let me kiss
The skies, the fountains, every region near
At large discourse, while here they do remain.
What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering here,
Stay, gentle Helena, hear my excuse:
Ready.
My Oberon! what visions have I seen!
Come, wait upon him, lead him to my bower.
Well, we will have such a prologue, and it shall be
A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love.
But, they do square, that all their elves for fear
You, mistress, all this coil is 'long of you:
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
Let her alone: speak not of Helena,
The juice of it on sleeping eye-lids laid
It fell upon a little western flower,
wants. I pray you, fail me not.
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
Re-enter PHILOSTRATE
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?
Yet but three? Come one more,
This flower's force in stirring love.
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Flower of this purple dye,
let him roar again.'
Reason becomes the marshal to my will
When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
And this ditty, after me,
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
And mark the musical confusion
Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.
With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine:
Is all the counsel that we two have shared,
Than all you fiery oes and eyes of light.
Of Learning, late deceased in beggary.'
The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.
Your virtue is my privilege: for that
Stand close: this is the same Athenian.
Deny your love, so rich within his soul,
Fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet, you!
I must employ you in some business
I'll apply
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
will tell you every thing, right as it fell out.
Never harm,
What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence:
Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall
obscenely and courageously. Take pains, be perfect: adieu.
We the globe can compass soon,
And I will overhear their conference.
So the boy Love is perjured every where:
Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
What revels are in hand? Is there no play,
If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.
love keep little company together now-a-days, the
And she in mild terms begg'd my patience,
To greet me with premeditated welcomes,
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius,
And shivering shocks
More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear,
Exeunt LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS
Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running
So, at his sight, away his fellows fly,
To bear him to my bower in fairy land.
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
In least speak most, to my capacity.
These vows are Hermia's: will you give her o'er?
Quail, crush, conclude, and quell!
Of our solemnities.
my sweet love?
There is a brief how many sports are ripe:
Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue,
I am aweary of this moon: would he would change!
And crows are fatted with the murrion flock,
Enter Pyramus
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,
That will ask some tears in the true performing of
Quench'd in the chaste beams of the watery moon,
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans,
And I in fury hither follow'd them,
more condoling.
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! vile thing, let loose,
And never did desire to see thee more.
We shall chide downright, if I longer stay.
Nor how it may concern my modesty,
Come, come to me,
Enter Lion and Moonshine
This falls out better than I could devise.
Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
Before the time I did Lysander see,
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
you?
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
Now die, die, die, die, die.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
Hail!
That you have but slumber'd here
according to the scrip.
speak in a monstrous little voice. 'Thisne,
We will meet, and there we may rehearse most
I read as much as from the rattling tongue
Dead? or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.
Who Pyramus presented, in their sport
Nor spell nor charm,
Joy, gentle friends! joy and fresh days of love
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits,
This lion is a very fox for his valour.
He murder cries and help from Athens calls.
An actor too, perhaps, if I see cause.
Fine, i'faith!
These things seem small and undistinguishable,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
You would not make me such an argument.
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
Was never holla'd to, nor cheer'd with horn,
Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.
Dies
Shall we their fond pageant see?
Here comes my messenger.
Then to the wood will he to-morrow night
Exit Moonshine
Shall shine from far
Must cover thy sweet eyes.
Two lovely berries moulded on one stem,
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Here, Peter Quince.
That befal preposterously.
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
'A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
Sound, music! Come, my queen, take hands with me,
Takes it in might, not merit.
All that I have to say, is, to tell you that the
you and desire you, to con them by to-morrow night,
bloods between fourteen and five-and-thirty?
I pray you, what is he?
[Reading out of a scroll]
I have a good eye, uncle, I can see a church by daylight.
What should I speak?
That were impossible: but, I pray you both,
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
We have been up and down to seek thee, for we are
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
Why, how now, count! wherefore are you sad?
What, my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?
To her foul-tainted flesh!
be of what colour it please God. Ha! the prince and
Not I, believe me.
under that title because I am merry. Yea, but so I
O, stay but till then!
My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten
man, I would have you think so, but, on my
You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
So you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing,
Two of them have the very bent of honour,
love, 'tis very possible he'll scorn it, for the
Well, stand aside. 'Fore God, they are both in a
Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
I know what you would say: if I have known her,
shaven Hercules in the smirched worm-eaten tapestry,
the next turning.
have all his rites.
I would bend under any heavy weight
No, uncle, I'll none: Adam's sons are my brethren,
If I know more of any man alive
Come, let us to the banquet.
I would fain know what you have to say.
Would the two princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Benedick's face,--
Hang it!
And therefore certainly it were not good
been troubled with a pernicious suitor. I thank God
Signior Benedick?
In the true course of all the question.
They swore that you were almost sick for me.
conclusion. For thy part, Claudio, I did think to
there to-morrow, there is a great coil to-night.
She did, indeed.
O, on my soul, my cousin is belied!
How, how, pray you? You amaze me: I would have I
Call up the right master constable. We have here
Is she not a modest young lady?
likelihood than to see me at her chamber-window,
Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.
runs presently mad. God help the noble Claudio! if
for I was told you were in a consumption.
Bid sorrow wag, cry 'hem!' when he should groan,
And, by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.
and happiness takes his leave.
SCENE III. LEONATO'S orchard.
Scrambling, out-facing, fashion-monging boys,
A good sharp fellow: I will send for him, and
a measure, and a cinque pace: the first suit is hot
fed and gone. Will you come presently?
left to protest.
We'll wait upon your lordship.
My visor is Philemon's roof, within the house is Jove.
Exeunt DON PEDRO, DON JOHN, and CLAUDIO
Yea, marry, that's the eftest way. Let the watch
In the state of honourable marriage:
that you are little better than false knaves, and it
Dost thou affect her, Claudio?
He were an excellent man that were made just in the
sheet of paper: my daughter tells us all.
that Hero loves me, intend a kind of zeal both to the
the fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is
Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in
Amen, if you love her, for the lady is very well worthy.
if peradventure this be true. Go you and tell her of it.
him their examination.
word in your ear: sir, I say to you, it is thought
corner and cry heigh-ho for a husband!
Hero! why, Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar!
is sometime afeared she will do a desperate outrage
seems her affections have their full bent. Love me!
when he would have walked ten mile a-foot to see a
bitterness.
Re-enter DON PEDRO
shall come over it, for, in most comely truth, thou
Of every hearer: for it so falls out
to the nurse and bid her still it.
Speak, count, 'tis your cue.
He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much
brother, was a villain.
So are the prince and Claudio, who accused her
Enter LEONATO, ANTONIO, HERO, BEATRICE, and others
was born to speak all mirth and no matter.
Pardon, goddess of the night,
home full numbers. I find here that Don Peter hath
love him, I should.'
How know you he loves her?
for no man's leisure, sleep when I am drowsy and
and I will tell you my drift.
Neighbours, you are tedious.
Give us the swords, we have bucklers of our own.
turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make
You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy.
Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou:--
at the temple, and there, before the whole
where his codpiece seems as massy as his club?
To-day to marry with my brother's daughter?
If half thy outward graces had been placed
That I neither feel how she should be loved nor
Being that I flow in grief,
Good morrow, masters: each his several way.
foul breath, and foul breath is noisome, therefore I
Fie upon thee! art not ashamed?
hath slandered, scorned, dishonoured my kinswoman? O
why the more is for your honesty.
Good morrow, coz.
Whisper her ear and tell her, I and Ursula
And bid her come hither.
What kind of catechising call you this?
And I do with an eye of love requite her.
I cannot bid you bid my daughter live,
to undo Hero and kill Leonato. Look you for any
Will you have me, lady?
Exeunt BENEDICK and LEONATO
O Hero, what a Hero hadst thou been,
shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?
I would not deny you, but, by this good day, I yield
Exeunt LEONATO and ANTONIO
She knew his love, lest she make sport at it.
his meat without grudging: and how you may be
I would she had bestowed this dotage on me: I would
I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it.
The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible
Now begin,
Of what, lady? of speaking honourably? Is not
Moral! no, by my troth, I have no moral meaning, I
fashion, yours is worth ten on 't.
[Coming forward]
how much he is unworthy so good a lady.
Good Lord, for alliance! Thus goes every one to the
reverend youth, and I praise God for you.
What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his
Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.
every day. But, I beseech your grace, pardon me: I
bettered expectation than you must expect of me to
should prove the mother of fools. I have brought
Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?
Question: why, an hour in clamour and a quarter in
other day. I said, thou hadst a fine wit: 'True,'
ear that he is in her heart.
Drink some wine ere you go: fare you well.
Exit
It appears not in this confession: there's not one
Under some biting error.
Change slander to remorse, that is some good:
Took up a beggar's issue at my gates,
No more words: the clerk is answered.
Re-enter BENEDICK
I am stuffed, cousin, I cannot smell.
Sweet prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.
Yet tell her of it: hear what she will say.
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.
accordant, he meant to take the present time by the
impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet of his
For my life, to break with him about Beatrice.
Enter DON PEDRO, CLAUDIO, and three or four with tapers
charge: you shall comprehend all vagrom men, you are
railed at herself, that she should be so immodest
Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?
'Nay,' said I, 'he hath the tongues:' 'That I
Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks,
out. Well, I'll be revenged as I may.
Enter DON PEDRO, DON JOHN, CLAUDIO, BENEDICK, and BALTHASAR
us! it is a world to see. Well said, i' faith,
O, by no means: she mocks all her wooers out of suit.
'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this
I had been writ down an ass!
Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
prince should woo Hero for himself, and having
'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.
Give not this rotten orange to your friend,
Cham's beard, do you any embassage to the Pigmies,
your arm, like a lieutenant's scarf? You must wear
in the army of any sort.
Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
another man is a fool when he dedicates his
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself,
He is then a giant to an ape, but then is an ape a
cannot show it in rhyme, I have tried: I can find
And hath challenged thee.
Yea, that she did: but yet, for all that, an if she
a goodly count, Count Comfect, a sweet gallant,
marry, and yet now, in despite of his heart, he eats
Until to-morrow morning, lords, farewell.
you.
And I will break with her and with her father,
get the learned writer to set down our
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites
knowing what hath passed between you and Claudio.
All this amazement can I qualify:
No, no, 'tis all men's office to speak patience
'twas not so, but, indeed, God forbid it should be
And so will he do, for the man doth fear God,
moreover, they have spoken untruths, secondarily,
For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love,
Exeunt all but BENEDICK and BEATRICE
neighbour Verges: well, God's a good man, an two men
Re-enter URSULA
form of marriage, and you shall recount their
Well.
Pray thee, fellow, peace: I do not like thy look,
There's little of the melancholy element in her, my
Mass, and my elbow itched, I thought there would a
should not be conjoined, charge you, on your souls,
thou art sad, get thee a wife, get thee a wife:
He is the only man of Italy.
SCENE II. A room in LEONATO's house.
found Benedick and Beatrice between the sheet?
Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
question him yourself.
This is an accident of hourly proof,
But, for my will, my will is your good will
To visit me. You know your office, brother:
Exeunt Ladies
Marry, it is your brother's right hand.
Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at
My lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.
they are slanders, sixth and lastly, they have
Will it serve for any model to build mischief on?
For here's a paper written in his hand,
SCENE II. LEONATO'S garden.
mouth, and half Count John's melancholy in Signior
He is composed and framed of treachery:
Your hand, Leonato, we will go together.
And how long is that, think you?
And do it with all thy heart.
companion, and he steals it.
I know we shall have revelling to-night:
You take pleasure then in the message?
a body, we have ten proofs to one that blood hath
Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame.
thy fee is a thousand ducats.
ale-houses, and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.
could not discover, these shallow fools have brought
Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman
well, but civil count, civil as an orange, and
if a man will be beaten with brains, a' shall wear
Farewell, my lords: we look for you to-morrow.
She would mock me into air, O, she would laugh me
--O God, that I were a man! I would eat his heart
prince's subjects. You shall also make no noise in
tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks his
discourse is sometime guarded with fragments, and
If your leisure served, I would speak with you.
Now, divine air! now is his soul ravished! Is it
When he shall hear she died upon his words,
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue:
they say I will bear myself proudly, if I perceive
O, one too much by thee! Why had I one?
now is the whole man governed with one: so that if
Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
and, masters, do not forget to specify, when time
Walk in the orchard and our whole discourse
forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible baldrick,
part to intermingle with them. But for which of my
hurt not. My lord, for your many courtesies I thank
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
The smallest twine may lead me.
upon the church-bench till two, and then all to bed.
I may say so, when I please.
Well, give them their charge, neighbour Dogberry.
At a word, I am not.
And when I have heard it, what blessing brings it?
And never to let Beatrice know of it.
O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease: he
Exeunt
As secretly and justly as your soul
sending that way, for it is said, 'God sends a curst
assaults of affection.
Let all my sins lack mercy! O my father,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul,
Will quench the wonder of her infamy:
To-morrow, my lord: time goes on crutches till love
No, I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to
him, for she'll be up twenty times a night, and
and, which is more, a householder, and, which is
How doth the lady?
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
Who I believe was pack'd in all this wrong,
Into Hey nonny, nonny.
Indeed, he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
Exit
To the death, my lord.
Enter HERO, MARGARET, and URSULA
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child,
mum, you are he: graces will appear, and there's an
another's dotage, and no such matter: that's the
sweet Benedick! God give me patience!'
Exeunt
praise, too brown for a fair praise and too little
By my soul, nor I:
Do not you love me?
And trust no agent, for beauty is a witch
Princes and counties! Surely, a princely testimony,
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.
Come, come, do you think I do not know you by your
thousand pound ere a' be cured.
till you may do it without controlment. You have of
Too curst is more than curst: I shall lessen God's
Dance. Then exeunt all except DON JOHN, BORACHIO, and CLAUDIO
What else?
yours: cloth o' gold, and cuts, and laced with
Enter DOGBERRY and VERGES with the Watch
Exeunt all except BENEDICK and CLAUDIO
gentlewoman to Hero.
Your answer, sir, is enigmatical:
O plague right well prevented! so will you say when
For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
I remember.
Whither?
Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made,
Than when she lived indeed, then shall he mourn,
wears a lock.
If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
My lord and brother, God save you!
Pray, write down, Borachio. Yours, sirrah?
honourable without marriage? I think you would have
talk with Margaret,
my heart to bestow it all of your worship.
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames
gentleman or other shall 'scape a predestinate
write God first, for God defend but God should go
I never tempted her with word too large,
Courtesy itself must convert to disdain, if you come
did not hate him deadly, she would love him dearly:
As Hector, I assure you: and in the managing of
Thou wilt be like a lover presently
In faith, I will go.
I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much
what a' will say.
When I do name him, let it be thy part
Music
First, of my word, therefore play, music. Prince,
Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
True, and they are to meddle with none but the
Master constable,--
I hear as good exclamation on your worship as of any
that I am an ass. No, thou villain, thou art full of
We'll have dancing afterward.
he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him
Graves, yawn and yield your dead,
What the good-year, my lord! why are you thus out
To slander music any more than once.
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds and injuries.
were a thought browner, and your gown's a most rare
and forbid him to wear it. I will only be bold
Which they themselves not feel, but, tasting it,
Masters, masters,--
Silence is the perfectest herald of joy: I were
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Good den, good den.
knaves as any in Messina.
my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.
The ladies follow her and but one visor remains.
Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite
Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches,
him, to be truly touched with love: if he be sad,
come forth. Masters, I charge you, in the prince's
Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.
What offence, sweet Beatrice?
write and read.
rare carpenter? Come, in what key shall a man take
But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
glory of my overthrow: if I can cross him any way, I
swimmer, Troilus the first employer of panders, and
Hearken after their offence, my lord.
and send her home again without a husband.
he is enamoured on Hero, I pray you, dissuade him
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool,
SCENE III. A church.
Yea, sir, we hope.
None, but to desire your good company.
Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a
A good old man, sir, he will be talking: as they
played their parts with Beatrice, and then the two
in his youth that he cannot endure in his age.
they are committed, and, to conclude, what you lay
wast the properest man in Italy.
Give her the right you should have given her cousin,
Why, then she's mine. Sweet, let me see your face.
professed apprehension?
you flout old ends any further, examine your
Thanks to you all, and leave us: fare you well.
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living
There, Leonato, take her back again:
that, cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or else
Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
But there is no such man: for, brother, men
Come hither, neighbour Seacole. God hath blessed
had losses, and one that hath two gowns and every
transgression is in the stealer.
stuffed tennis-balls.
And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils, which hit,
about Signior Leonato's door, for the wedding being
Don John had made, away went Claudio enraged, swore
watchman, for I cannot see how sleeping should
such meet food to feed it as Signior Benedick?
it in practise. Be cunning in the working this, and
No, not to be so odd and from all fashions
Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord:
'Nay,' said I, 'a good wit:' 'Just,' said she, 'it
Conrade, I say!
cost, and you encounter it.
I' faith, I thank him, he hath bid me to a calf's
How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?
As we do trace this alley up and down,
tend on no man's business, laugh when I am merry and
almost a fray.
In spite of your heart, I think, alas, poor heart!
Heavily, heavily.
measure, full of state and ancientry, and then comes
And knows me, and knows me,
Midnight, assist our moan,
That thou began'st to twist so fine a story?
recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that
which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me?
wooing, wedding, and repenting, is as a Scotch jig,
hypocrite, but prays from his heart.
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Enter BEATRICE
Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
You'll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.
witnesses: bear it coldly but till midnight, and
you have seen the sequel.
Gives her fame which never dies.
Come, bring away the plaintiffs: by this time our
a woodcock too?
To bind me, or undo me, one of them.
bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the gaol: we
Kissing her
for he both pleases men and angers them, and then
which, peradventure not marked or not laughed at,
Go anticly, show outward hideousness,
trust my expectation.
No, sure, my lord, my mother cried, but then there
world's end? I will go on the slightest errand now
Speak low, if you speak love.
marry her: my villany they have upon record, which
I pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.
the challenge, subscribed for Cupid, and challenged
I'll prove it on his body, if he dare,
What means the fool, trow?
Brother,--
and in such great letters as they write 'Here is
I am in the favour of Margaret, the waiting
That, when I note another man like him,
To tell you true, I counterfeit him.
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself,
Yea, or to paint himself? for the which, I hear
I do.
have daffed all other respects and made her half
Even he.
Exeunt
My cousin's a fool, and thou art another: I'll wear
Marry, sir, they have committed false report,
O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand.
Mark how short his answer is,--With Hero, Leonato's
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
As freely, son, as God did give her me.
Then after to her father will I break,
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! farewell,
Before God! and, in my mind, very wise.
commendation is not in his wit, but in his villany,
Lady, what man is he you are accused of?
What shall become of this? what will this do?
brought me up, I likewise give her most humble
Tush! I may as well say the fool's the fool. But
fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.
thought her spirit had been invincible against all
sailing by the star.
Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
Hero thinks surely she will die, for she says she
If you dare not trust that you see, confess not
By my troth, 's not so good, and I warrant your
Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him: conclude,
Dost thou not suspect my place? dost thou not
I love thee.
with Benedick for his company, for, from the crown
Enter DON PEDRO and CLAUDIO, and two or three others
Now, signior, what news?
And I'll be sworn upon't that he loves her,
shall fall in love with Benedick, and I, with your
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed:
You hear, Count Claudio: I can be secret as a dumb
So I would not he should do me, my lord, lest I
Hath your grace ne'er a brother like you? Your
Off, coxcomb!
man in the city, and though I be but a poor man, I
she make her love known, and she will die, if he woo
them in my forehead: and let me be vilely painted,
Why how now? do you speak in the sick tune?
This man said, sir, that Don John, the prince's
Why, i' faith, methinks she's too low for a high
But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on
make another curtsy and say 'Father, as it please
I'll hold my mind, were she an Ethiope.
kiss your hand, and so I leave you. By this hand,
By my troth, I speak my thought.
do not like her.
shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance: nay,
to present the prince's own person: if you meet the
world but I, and I am sunburnt, I may sit in a
As once Europa did at lusty Jove,
Benedick, Don John, and all the gallants of the
brother is royally entertained by Leonato: and I
belied a lady, thirdly, they have verified unjust
Not so, neither: but know that I have to-night
How now! interjections? Why, then, some be of
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
beard on his face: I had rather lie in the woollen.
husband have stables enough, you'll see he shall
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Come, 'tis no matter:
It is the witness still of excellency
can be in love. Yet Benedick was such another, and
will teach you how to humour your cousin, that she
Let us to the great supper: their cheer is the
Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill'd my child:
By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think
partridge wing saved, for the fool will eat no
Well, daughter, and you gentle-women all,
glad of it.
up of these men's bills.
I go, let me go with that I came, which is, with
And when I lived, I was your other wife:
And how do you?
Marry, sir, our watch to-night, excepting your
to me in the orchard.
Here comes the prince and Claudio hastily.
I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe
O God, counterfeit! There was never counterfeit of
I'll devise thee brave punishments for him.
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
from her: she is no equal for his birth: you may
niece your daughter and meant to acknowledge it
That he'll enjoin me to.
a face as yours were.
me.'
I know her spirits are as coy and wild
shall fall in love with Beatrice. If we can do this,
You have put him down, lady, you have put him down.
killed and eaten in these wars? But how many hath
O, that exceeds, they say.
Your worship speaks like a most thankful and
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero?
not such a fool to think what I list, nor I list
Tarry, sweet Beatrice.
To do what, signior?
signior, walk aside with me: I have studied eight
swear he loves me.
do the part of an honest man in it.
Proof enough to misuse the prince, to vex Claudio,
You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
Round about her tomb they go.
Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called thee?
wronged by you.
that you know: if you will follow me, I will show
the old man's daughter told us all.
nights' watchings.
I will not hear you.
to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder and Vulcan a
as the first of May doth the last of December. But I
Mine innocent child?
not show itself modest enough without a badge of
We have some haste, Leonato.
hobby-horses must not hear.
Yea, marry, dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee,
of your marriage as to show a child his new coat
Exeunt DOGBERRY and VERGES
What, courage, man! What though care killed a cat,
SCENE I. A hall in LEONATO'S house.
possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as
he hath wronged his honour in marrying the renowned
Save this of hers, framed by thy villany!
you, who is his companion? Is there no young
You have stayed me in a happy hour: I was about to
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
you enough, and when you have seen more and heard
she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked
Hath no man's dagger here a point for me?
Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow.
Why, then, take no note of him, but let him go, and
I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
Sweet Hero! now thy image doth appear
night-raven, come what plague could have come after
excellent stomach.
She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.
The former Hero! Hero that is dead!
scold with her. She told me, not thinking I had been
do solicit you in that kind, you know your answer.
O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.
Withdraws
me, like an old cuckold, with horns on his head, and
Yes, the fashion is the fashion.
in hand in sad conference: I whipt me behind the
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Nay, that's certain, we have the exhibition to examine.
deceived even your very eyes: what your wisdoms
No, an he were, I would burn my study. But, I pray
Marry, sir, we say we are none.
Here stand a pair of honourable men,
The story that is printed in her blood?
bound to your answer? this learned constable is
shortened, for she has been too long a talking of,
And, truly, I'll devise some honest slanders
And surely as I live, I am a maid.
Than to drive liking to the name of love:
conclude he is in love.
Enter DOGBERRY, VERGES, and the Watch, with CONRADE and BORACHIO
In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.
am glad to hear it.
With candle-wasters, bring him yet to me,
could say she were worse: think you of a worse
tell thee how the prince, Claudio and my master,
town, are come to fetch you to church.
affection the one with the other. I would fain have
It is so, indeed, he is no less than a stuffed man:
Both which, master constable,--
Clap's into 'Light o' love,' that goes without a
me say, 'saving your reverence, a husband:' and bad
Don Pedro: he hath borne himself beyond the
The fraud of men was ever so,
Exeunt
And mine that I was proud on, mine so much
him but I am heart-burned an hour after.
Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.
a merry hour.
In most profound earnest, and, I'll warrant you, for
why, it must be requited. I hear how I am censured:
have need of poor ones, poor ones may make what
there is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn.
the lady is disloyal.
Yea, wherefore should she not?
Containing her affection unto Benedick.
and the garland too, for the garland he might have
herself. Be happy, lady, for you are like an
cow short horns,' but to a cow too curst he sends none.
Sure my brother is amorous on Hero and hath
Take their examination yourself and bring it me: I
Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?
Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss
myself. I pray you, tell Benedick of it, and hear
First, I ask thee what they have done, thirdly, I
or nine wise words to speak to you, which these
But what was true and very full of proof.
That could endure the toothache patiently,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
My heart is with your liking.
Suffer love! a good epithet! I do suffer love
senseless and fit man for the constable of the
A thousand blushing apparitions
If this were so, so were it uttered.
man, I am not for him: therefore, I will even take
you: I must discontinue your company: your brother
some scholar would conjure her, for certainly, while
for a great praise: only this commendation I can
particular duties afterwards.
come to take hands, and then, with public
Can the world buy such a jewel?
this from Hero. They seem to pity the lady: it
Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.
bow-string and the little hangman dare not shoot at
I know not. If they speak but truth of her,
tongue speaks.
he will make. Well I am sorry for your niece. Shall
signior: fare you well.
broke cross.
name, I have done.
Master constable, let these men be bound, and
The prince and Claudio promised by this hour
Very ill too.
And publish it that she is dead indeed,
Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I
accustomed crossness.
chosen for the prince's watch.
O villain! thou wilt be condemned into everlasting
See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
I am yours for the walk, and especially when I walk away.
lack no barns.
And since you could not be my son-in-law,
Let me but move one question to your daughter,
Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick too much,
Borachio.
Come, come, let us thither: this may prove food to
and the right wife, otherwise 'tis light, and not
And got a calf in that same noble feat
mirth: he hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's
laughing, as, ah, ha, he!
O mischief strangely thwarting!
Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knife's
There is some strange misprision in the princes.
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
them with a most Christian-like fear.
ACT I
Like the old tale, my lord: 'it is not so, nor
Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me
priests in the old church-window, sometime like the
Enter BEATRICE, behind
What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or
them the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
Enter BENEDICK
conflict four of his five wits went halting off, and
Is he not approved in the height a villain, that
You always end with a jade's trick: I know you of old.
Exeunt
thus. They will scarcely believe this without trial:
two helps, will so practise on Benedick that, in
Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if
sell bullocks. But did you think the prince would
...
I may avoid him: which of these is he?
things, and, to conclude, they are lying knaves.
there will she sit in her smock till she have writ a
hear from you.
stolen. Well, you are to call at all the
I think I told your lordship a year since, how much
mercy, friend, go you with me, and I will use your
evenly with mine. How canst thou cross this marriage?
Leonato's: commend me to him and tell him I will
Then sigh not so,  and c.
I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be
vanity. You are thought here to be the most
the orchard and saw me court Margaret in Hero's
Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? The
To listen our purpose.  This is thy office,
What I have done being young, or what would do
Is our whole dissembly appeared?
would have it at the Lady Hero's chamber-window.
If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the
God's my life, where's the sexton? let him write
Well, masters, we hear our charge: let us go sit here
Come, neighbour.
Good day to both of you.
against Benedick.
you, who, as I take it, have stolen his birds' nest.
Thou thinkest I am in sport: I pray thee tell me
Were it good, think you?
behaviors to love, will, after he hath laughed at
in the world, if a' could get her good-will.
pretty jest your daughter told us of.
Is it possible disdain should die while she hath
you killed a sweet and innocent lady. For my Lord
ask thee what's their offence, sixth and lastly, why
Enter Boy
How if they will not?
apes into hell.
Why, every day, to-morrow. Come, go in:
Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached alley in mine
meeting may be wished, God prohibit it! Come, neighbour.
That dare as well answer a man indeed
And a good soldier too, lady.
virtues: yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou
Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just
keep below stairs?
Marry, this it is, sir.
And I, my lord.
name, the which he hath used so long and never paid
doublet and hose and leaves off his wit!
No, the world must be peopled. When I said I would
And give her to young Claudio.
good counsel.
[Aside]  Peace! stir not.
so forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee
A commodity in question, I warrant you. Come, we'll obey you.
I will not think it.
to their charge.
yours, for I will never love that which my friend hates.
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
you are mine, I am yours: I give away myself for
be sad. Did he not say, my brother was fled?
And seem'd I ever otherwise to you?
Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you:
possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty
I came yonder from a great supper: the prince your
Are you good men and true?
SCENE II. The same.
Signior Benedick, no, for then were you a child.
If low, an agate very vilely cut,
was a star danced, and under that was I born.
If you would know your wronger, look on me.
plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either
fair, or I'll   never look on her, mild, or come not
Yea, by mass, that it is.
SCENE III. The same.
Smother her spirits up.
over and over as my poor self in love. Marry, I
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber-window
Enter Attendants
you say honestly.
Talk with a man out at a window! A proper saying!
What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?
cinque pace faster and faster, till he sink into his grave.
All thy tediousness on me, ah?
Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
Hear you. my lords,--
For others say thou dost deserve, and I
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
excellent perfume.
Writ in my cousin's hand, stolen from her pocket,
to write to one that she knew would flout her, 'I
I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied Beatrice,
Only to despite them, I will endeavour any thing.
A dear happiness to women: they would else have
Unmasking
but he'll be meet with you, I doubt it not.
ass, though it be not written down, yet forget not
And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is
fair Hero is won: I have broke with her father,
Brother Antony,--
skill. Good cousin, have a care this busy time.
Monsieur Love! I will hide me in the arbour.
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
too cunning to be understood: what's your offence?
Exit
like a man at a mark, with a whole army shooting at
To be married to her: friar, you come to marry her.
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd
squarer now that will make a voyage with him to the devil?
If not a present remedy, at least a patient
white-bearded fellow speaks it: knavery cannot,
poor duke's officers, but truly, for mine own part,
As much as may be yielded to a man:
Valuing of her,--why, she, O, she is fallen
Exit
Is't possible?
Nor will you not tell me who you are?
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst,
hands on him?
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
Daughter, remember what I told you: if the prince
supper that night.
Cousins, God give you joy!
Adieu: be vigitant, I beseech you.
O, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence,
Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter:
to the Antipodes that you can devise to send me on,
The idea of her life shall sweetly creep
A very forward March-chick! How came you to this?
the bastard is fled from Messina: you have among
Nothing I, but God send every one their heart's desire!
Kill Claudio.
Look, what will serve is fit: 'tis once, thou lovest,
lamb when it baes will never answer a calf when he bleats.
No, and swears she never will: that's her torment.
Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoh's soldiers
Death, in guerdon of her wrongs,
Lives in death with glorious fame.
and place shall serve, that I am an ass.
And counsel him to fight against his passion.
Nay, a' rubs himself with civet: can you smell him
Till death be uttered,
Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof,
My liege, your highness now may do me good.
At a word, I am not.
Why, that's spoken like an honest drovier: so they
quarrels you may say he is wise, for either he
SCENE II. A room in LEONATO'S house
Why, what effects of passion shows she?
Before this friar and swear to marry her.
upon great persuasion, and partly to save your life,
duller than a great thaw, huddling jest upon jest
Good den, brother.
and our wives' heels.
it.
surely! O that I were a man for his sake! or that I
I wonder at it.
occasion may detain us longer. I dare swear he is no
No glory lives behind the back of such.
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
I came hither to tell you, and, circumstances
you too, for here comes one in haste.
Enter DON PEDRO, DON JOHN, LEONATO, FRIAR FRANCIS, CLAUDIO, BENEDICK, HERO, BEATRICE, and Attendants
there live we as merry as the day is long.
Another Hero!
And so am I.
Sweet Hero! She is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.
passion came so near the life of passion as she
For this I owe you: here comes other reckonings.
daughter of Leonato.
of Hero's disloyalty that jealousy shall be called
Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
shall give you direction.
Hero was in this manner accused, in this very manner
to this man how Don John your brother incensed me
Possess the people in Messina here
lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me
Hath any man seen him at the barber's?
Now, pray thee, come,
brought to Leonato's: I will go before and show
And, in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.
his grace, and it better fits my blood to be
To-night I take my leave. This naughty man
the love come from her, they say too that she will
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister,
I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
I up my apes, and away to Saint Peter for the
Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the
If it will not be, I'll leave you.
Which is as bad as die with tickling.
him eat it that says I love not you.
O, God help me! God help me! how long have you
Bashful sincerity and comely love.
sanctuary, and people sin upon purpose, because they
Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song again.
Come, will you go with me?
man against his will.
cousin: I must say she is dead: and so, farewell.
No, rather I will go to Benedick
the windy side of care. My cousin tells him in his
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
Yes, faith, it is my cousin's duty to make curtsy
The tenor of my book, trust not my age,
It is so, the Count Claudio shall marry the
to be known a reasonable creature. Who is his
O, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be
As hush'd on purpose to grace harmony!
afford her, that were she other than she is, she
Approaching the bower
For the which she wept heartily and said she cared
nobody: is there any harm in 'the heavier for a
Have comfort, lady.
me. She speaks poniards, and every word stabs:
to seek you both.
he would meet her, as he was appointed, next morning
A kind overflow of kindness: there are no faces
Messina, and one that knows the law, go to, and a
a muzzle and enfranchised with a clog, therefore I
I wish him joy of her.
Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing
O, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
That.
never think to marry: I must not seem proud: happy
Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs,
nothing to a man.
I heard him swear his affection.
Confirm'd, confirm'd! O, that is stronger made
the shoulder, and called Adam.
And an ill singer, my lord.
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.
Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be
Let there be the same net spread for her, and that
How sweetly you do minister to love,
Cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.
do you hear me, and let this count kill me. I have
So angle we for Beatrice, who even now
Ha, ha, ha! Well, masters, good night: an there be
what I am: I must be sad when I have cause and smile
He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.
Yearly will I do this rite.
Call her forth, brother, here's the friar ready.
But which are the offenders that are to be
But that my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not
Tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me:
When you went onward on this ended action,
none but libertines delight in him, and the
the feats of a lion: he hath indeed better
Re-enter LEONATO and ANTONIO, with the Sexton
Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.
that I were a man! What, bear her in hand until they
To what end? He would make but a sport of it and
You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.
hath he provided this music?
one Deformed: they say be wears a key in his ear and
Enter LEONATO, with DOGBERRY and VERGES
they would have hanged him: and I pray God his bad
You must be father to your brother's daughter
rather than hold three words' conference with this
Fie, fie! they are not to be named, my lord,
Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.
because I have railed so long against marriage: but
seest thou not what a deformed thief this fashion
In great measure.
wed, there will I shame her.
See, see, here comes the man we went to seek.
Good day, my lord.
I know not that, when he knows what I know.
But did my brother set thee on to this?
Was the Hero that here lies:
Thou naughty varlet!
I will assume thy part in some disguise
'Tis well consented: presently away,
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds,
A miracle! here's our own hands against our hearts.
protest I loved you.
beseech your worship to correct yourself, for the
And that shall Claudio know, so shall the prince
right to trust none, and the fine is, for the which
To stain my cousin with: one doth not know
truly how thou likest her.
To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
It is a man's office, but not yours.
he transgressed: she would have made Hercules have
Cousins, you know what you have to do. O, I cry you
Which falls into mine ears as profitless
And then to Leonato's we will go.
I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death:
That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.
To-night I'll mourn with Hero.
working-days: your grace is too costly to wear
When I like your favour, for God defend the lute
of measure sad?
were married. Here comes Beatrice. By this day!
Well, sir.
No, truly, but in friendly recompense.
Not to be spoke of,
I know. Thus far can I praise him, he is of a noble
he wants money.
furthest inch of Asia, bring you the length of
life, to make thee a double-dealer, which, out of
Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.
Please it your grace lead on?
shall not shame me.
I pray you, leave me.
to bid any man stand, in the prince's name.
out no rhyme to 'lady' but 'baby,' an innocent
is?
That sits above,
Have been deceived, they swore you did.
Enter BENEDICK
If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.
Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
converted I know not, but methinks you look with
Come, come, we are friends: let's have a dance ere
greater that I am subdued. Would the cook were of
I am out of all other tune, methinks.
In some reclusive and religious life,
Should with your body.
truer than those that are so washed. How much
O, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice
If it proves so, then loving goes by haps:
Enter CLAUDIO, BEATRICE, HERO, and LEONATO
Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.
I do embrace your offer, and dispose
Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer
worn himself, and the rod he might have bestowed on
By this light, he changes more and more: I think
other, if she will not discover it.
This same is she, and I do give you her.
Well, every one can master a grief but he that has
it one way, for the prince hath got your Hero.
Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.
looked on.
Pause awhile,
out of the 'Hundred Merry Tales:'--well this was
And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join
Know you any, count?
high-proof melancholy and would fain have it beaten
She doth well: if she should make tender of her
Can you make no use of your discontent?
ride of a horse, one must ride behind. An honest
And this is more, masters, than you can deny.
That what we have we prize not to the worth
Myself, my brother and this grieved count
I promise thee.
Lackbeard there, he and I shall meet: and, till
Benedick: nobody marks you.
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
How pitiful I deserve,--
married man'?
I might have said 'No part of it is mine,
not.
die a bachelor, I did not think I should live till I
way for you, if you do take a thief, is to let him
he be angry indeed.
it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if
You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady.
Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more,
I fear thee not.
protest your cowardice. You have killed a sweet
All, all, and, moreover, God saw him when he was
And thought they Margaret was Hero?
my daughter tell you how.
strain, of approved valour and confirmed honesty. I
torment the poor lady worse.
tale. Have you writ down, that they are none?
Her mother hath many times told me so.
Signior?
Madam, withdraw: the prince, the count, Signior
That liked, but had a rougher task in hand
my troth, there's one meaning well suited.
that you frame the season for your own harvest.
I dare make his answer, none.
price they will.
Men were deceivers ever,
kind of merry war betwixt Signior Benedick and her:
And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that
If I see any thing to-night why I should not marry
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death:
truth, I can bear them witness, and virtuous, 'tis
Never any did so, though very many have been beside
And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
Our talk must only be of Benedick.
kinsman, live unbruised and love my cousin.
name, friend?
do, not knowing what they do!
sport will be, when they hold one an opinion of
You should hear reason.
And she lies buried with her ancestors,
Always excepted my dear Claudio.
It is, my lord.
Never speak: we charge you let us obey you to go with us.
O, he's returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.
or I'll none, virtuous, or I'll never cheapen her,
Why, then, let them alone till they are sober: if
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
out by that?
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly:
He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.
thanks: but that I will have a recheat winded in my
As best befits her wounded reputation,
Sundays. Look Don Pedro is returned to seek you.
and his good will obtained: name the day of
If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call
I will not desire that.
Sweet prince, why speak not you?
and so dance out the answer. For, hear me, Hero:
I know not what to say.
hurts nobody.' 'Nay,' said I, 'the gentleman
How much an ill word may empoison liking.
him, he hath a heart as sound as a bell and his
my liking: in the meantime let me be that I am and
if he break the peace, he ought to enter into a
devil my master knew she was Margaret, and partly
Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile, and I gave
things answer my mind.
And when was he wont to wash his face?
By'r lady, I think it be so.
He is very near by this: he was not three leagues off
carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont to
Very ill.
curiously, say my knife's naught. Shall I not find
Make those that do offend you suffer too.
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.
Hang thou there upon the tomb,
Yea, and paid me richly for the practise of it.
before her wedding-day: if you love her then,
I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll
When he would play the noble beast in love.
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
Record it with your high and worthy deeds:
well, and in dearness of heart hath holp to effect
Hath Leonato any son, my lord?
offend: only, have a care that your bills be not
What is it, my good friends?
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied,
thing handsome about him. Bring him away. O that
Exeunt LEONATO and Messenger
Believe it better than reportingly.
Nothing, unless you render her again.
and my cold blood, I am of your humour for that: I
A lord to a lord, a man to a man, stuffed with all
Although against her will, as it appears
We must follow the leaders.
Give me this maid, your daughter?
could wish he would modestly examine himself, to see
the prince your brother, I owe you all duty.
Here comes the prince and Claudio.
villany should be so rich, for when rich villains
Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
So say I	methinks you are sadder.
Don Pedro is approached.
Not a false gallop.
Enter BEATRICE
have his head on her shoulders for all Messina, as
Enough, I am engaged, I will challenge him. I will
Out on thee! Seeming! I will write against it:
All this I see, and I see that the fashion wears
endure my Lady Tongue.
compliment, and men are only turned into tongue, and
Exeunt
the brain awe a man from the career of his humour?
Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?
But, on my honour, she was charged with nothing
tell you how.
the lime of good neighbours. If a man do not erect
and, truly, I hold it a sin to match in my kindred.
To burn the errors that these princes hold
I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.
one!
question, thou wilt be, if my cousin do not look
head and a capon, the which if I do not carve most
Much deserved on his part and equally remembered by
Most sincerely.
that touch pitch will be defiled: the most peaceable
conscience: and so I leave you.
in love. With who? now that is your grace's part.
Sweet prince, let me go no farther to mine answer:
SCENE IV. A room in LEONATO'S house.
Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made,
Only foul words, and thereupon I will kiss thee.
Exit ANTONIO
master's false accusation, and, briefly, I desire
My love is thine to teach: teach it but how,
Exeunt DOGBERRY and VERGES
And so am I, being else by faith enforced
SONG.
For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.
There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be
Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you
obtained her, give her to Count Claudio.
you three will but minister such assistance as I
Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
What proof shall I make of that?
of men's bodies? Well, a horn for my money, when
Exeunt
Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio:
by his oaths, which first possessed them, partly by
an oak but with one green leaf on it would have
say they are not the men you took them for.
Yea, my lord, but I can cross it.
of his head to the sole of his foot, he is all
Against that power that bred it: there will she hide her,
therefore the sadness is without limit.
Think not on him till to-morrow:
But are you sure
Be yet my nephew: my brother hath a daughter,
Enter BORACHIO and CONRADE
Did I not tell you she was innocent?
And so she doth, cousin.
something of that jealous complexion.
the prince your brother, spare not to tell him that
Is Claudio thine enemy?
SCENE I. Before LEONATO'S house.
with him but the drum and the fife, and now had he
I learn in this letter that Don Peter of Arragon
And one Deformed is one of them: I know him, a'
If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot
I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make
Signior Benedick.
In my chamber-window lies a book: bring it hither
Come, I will have thee, but, by this light, I take
conference was sadly borne. They have the truth of
Benedick bear it, pluck off the bull's horns and set
Let me bid you welcome, my lord: being reconciled to
If he be not in love with some woman, there is no
Shall I never see a bachelor of three-score again?
would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard
any matter of weight chances, call up me: keep your
The sight whereof I think you had from me,
born under Saturn, goest about to apply a moral
Then half Signior Benedick's tongue in Count John's
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form:
Come, shall we hear this music?
have served you thus?
Would you buy her, that you inquire after her?
let that appear when there is no need of such
utter all to thee.
As the event stamps them: but they have a good
Of dumps so dull and heavy,
in faith, honest as the skin between his brows.
Cupid at the flight, and my uncle's fool, reading
There is no measure in the occasion that breeds,
Serve God, love me and mend. There will I leave
Yea, the same.
will go near to be thought so shortly. How answer
Done to death by slanderous tongues
That eye my daughter lent her: 'tis most true.
lord: she is never sad but when she sleeps, and
Out of myself, press me to death with wit.
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
you: nay, I pray you, let me go.
Come you, sir: if justice cannot tame you, she
And so extenuate the 'forehand sin:
Ho! now you strike like the blind man: 'twas the
of the prince's subjects.
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
Where is but a humour or a worm.
say, when the age is in, the wit is out: God help
No child but Hero, she's his only heir.
in the market-place.
no great argument of her folly, for I will be
Is this the monument of Leonato?
Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.
To one thing constant never:
The greatest note of it is his melancholy.
Come, bid me do any thing for thee.
I should think this a gull, but that the
What's the matter?
Bait the hook well, this fish will bite.
No, but to the gate, and there will the devil meet
Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, and you
Is very much unto the prince and Claudio,
Which is the lady I must seize upon?
is wise:' 'Certain,' said she, 'a wise gentleman.'
what you are, being a man. Truly, the lady fathers
abused, and Don John is the author of all, who is
Soft and fair, friar. Which is Beatrice?
Do, do: he'll but break a comparison or two on me,
widow weeps.
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
Good morrow, prince, good morrow, Claudio:
Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense,
Thus answer I in the name of Benedick,
therefore your grace may well say I have lost it.
praising myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is
should be otherwise.
therefore never flout at me for what I have said
That she is worthy, I know.
For there was never yet philosopher
By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.
my displeasure. That young start-up hath all the
are not alike, alas, good neighbour!
But, brother Antony,--
Than I can lay it down in likelihood.
see her chamber-window entered, even the night
grace say Amen to it.
My lord, my lord,
a lock hanging by it, and borrows money in God's
When after that the holy rites are ended,
May a man do it?
overmastered with a pierce of valiant dust? to make
And some such strange bull leap'd your father's cow,
God bless me from a challenge!
Marry, that am I and my partner.
fashion, i' faith. I saw the Duchess of Milan's
had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man
The virtue that possession would not show us
O, she misused me past the endurance of a block!
For henceforth of poor Claudio.
Are you so hasty now? well, all is one.
I know you by the waggling of your head.
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
Enter BEATRICE
If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.
I know none of that name, lady: there was none such
In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.
How then? sick?
And when you loved, you were my other husband.
reputation, who is thus like to be cozened with the
I have the toothache.
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb
An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived in
Fear you not my part of the dialogue.
Didst thou not hear somebody?
Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much?
[Aside to CLAUDIO]  You are a villain, I jest not:
The god of love,
It were a better death than die with mocks,
assurance and all the preparation overthrown.
How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see
Speak, cousin, or, if you cannot, stop his mouth
Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at
these eyes? I cannot tell, I think not: I will not
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low,
matter: an old man, sir, and his wits are not so
The Song
And made defeat of her virginity,--
are he, you are he.
Nothing certainer:
Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
her husband.
Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
then go I toward Arragon.
to my shame. The lady is dead upon mine and my
Which I mistrusted not. Farewell, therefore, Hero!
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
Proposing with the prince and Claudio:
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.
with such impossible conveyance upon me that I stood
Why had I not with charitable hand
What news, Borachio?
her to rise.
Against yourself.
No, that you shall not, till you take her hand
horribly in love with her. I may chance have some
her the infernal Ate in good apparel. I would to God
And speak off half a dozen dangerous words,
For the letter that begins them all, H.
This looks not like a nuptial.
rheum: therefore is it most expedient for the
Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet
a state of evil that they will not admit any good
And fled he is upon this villany.
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
Exit
Exeunt
And never shall it more be gracious.
As haggerds of the rock.
beats her heart, tears her hair, prays, curses, 'O
Well, I would you did like me.
Two of them did, the prince and Claudio, but the
warren: I told him, and I think I told him true,
What is he that you ask for, niece?
dully by us. I will in the interim undertake one of
fellows' counsels and your own, and good night.
gentleman: I remember his name.
It is in my scabbard: shall I draw it?
of me, he shall never make me such a fool. One woman
Meantime let wonder seem familiar,
musty room, comes me the prince and Claudio, hand
of beauty.
wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humour. Dost
Enter DON JOHN and BORACHIO
bestowed much honour on a young Florentine called Claudio.
mouth, I would bite, if I had my liberty, I would do
though, I'll be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is
Not sad, my lord.
And when I send for you, come hither mask'd.
salvation, body and soul.
Neither, my lord.
County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?
I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night,
The sixth of July: Your loving friend, Benedick.
minstrels, draw, to pleasure us.
vouchsafe me.
But, soft you, let me be: pluck up, my heart, and
to slander the Lady Hero, how you were brought into
a youth is not for me, and he that is less than a
that shall drive some of them to a non-come: only
as braggarts do their blades, which God be thanked,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
accusation, uncovered slander, unmitigated rancour,
the prince be willing, for, indeed, the watch ought
Despite his nice fence and his active practise,
the prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my
scratched face.
show himself what he is and steal out of your company.
Nay, by'r our lady, that I think a' cannot.
O, my lord,
That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?
If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antique,
title, and I will fit her to it. Wonder not till
I'll tell thee what, prince, a college of
Do so: farewell.
Why, then, your visor should be thatched.
can give you intelligence of an intended marriage.
Come, lady, die to live: this wedding-day
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
Why, he is the prince's jester: a very dull fool,
short daughter.
good horse to hire,' let them signify under my sign
fair weather that you make yourself: it is needful
them to mending. They say the lady is fair, 'tis a
You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.
Yea, marry, let them come before me. What is your
Show me briefly how.
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown,
Enter LEONATO and ANTONIO, meeting
The practise of it lives in John the bastard,
and lay it to your heart: it is the only thing for a qualm.
And strong encounter of my amorous tale:
By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.
I talk'd with no man at that hour, my lord.
to light: who in the night overheard me confessing
speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest man
A very even way, but no such friend.
You say not right, old man.
To the tuition of God: From my house, if I had it,--
down the prince's officer coxcomb. Come, bind them.
your ensuing marriage,--surely suit ill spent and
Is this face Hero's? are our eyes our own?
Enter a Messenger
I will fetch you a tooth-picker now from the
Truly, by your office, you may, but I think they
wise man among twenty that will praise himself.
Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more
they laugh at him and beat him. I am sure he is in
Which is the villain? let me see his eyes,
'Then' is spoken, fare you well now: and yet, ere
blank verse, why, they were never so truly turned
You have it full, Benedick: we may guess by this
If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay
the fashion of his hat, it ever changes with the
Go, good partner, go, get you to Francis Seacole,
Where honeysuckles, ripen'd by the sun,
itself: but I will acquaint my daughter withal,
Let every eye negotiate for itself
enough in his purse, such a man would win any woman
appears much joy in him, even so much that joy could
And never gives to truth and virtue that
No, nor I neither, but most wonderful that she
O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
The fairest grant is the necessity.
Exeunt, severally
the dark night, which did deceive them, but chiefly
SCENE IV. HERO's apartment.
but little happy, if I could say how much. Lady, as
And though you know my inwardness and love
To put a strange face on his own perfection.
thyself giddy with the fashion too, that thou hast
blunt as, God help, I would desire they were, but,
constable?
that I might have cudgelled thee out of thy single
to this foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no
exceedingly narrowly to thee.
not wooed in good time: if the prince be too
You know he does.
Claudio, and bring them to see this the very night
Hired to it by your brother.
Maintain a mourning ostentation
rather hear the tabour and the pipe: I have known
with a kiss, and let not him speak neither.
If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not
You have been always called a merciful man, partner.
Marry, that can Hero,
you strange news that you yet dreamt not of.
A most manly wit, Margaret, it will not hurt a
Do not live, Hero, do not ope thine eyes:
semblance of a maid,--that you have discovered
By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a
And we must do it wisely.
Sir, I say to you we are none.
had any friend would be a man for my sake! But
shape of two countries at once, as, a German from
Enter LEONATO, ANTONIO, BENEDICK, BEATRICE, MARGARET, URSULA, FRIAR FRANCIS, and HERO
impossible you should take true root but by the
Help us to sigh and groan,
Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any
contrary, if Hero would be my wife.
I must leave you.
out more apparel than the man. But art not thou
All this is so: but what of this, my lord?
And sing it to her bones, sing it to-night:
they should have any allegiance in them, being
'Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?
you must call forth the watch that are their accusers.
were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is, I
We had like to have had our two noses snapped off
are now to examination these men.
That appertain unto a burial.
He is in earnest.
And to the chapel let us presently.
Count Claudio?
SCENE II. A prison.
John, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable encounter.
am apt to do myself wrong, I am not so reputed: it
I will presently go learn their day of marriage.
Is there any way to show such friendship?
Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living
So says the prince and my new-trothed lord.
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
bears will not bite one another when they meet.
Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing:
How innocent she died, and if your love
Why, no, no more than reason.
we go seek Benedick, and tell him of her love?
But you are more intemperate in your blood
Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice, and desire
Ha! 'Against my will I am sent to bid you come in
howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests
in this age his own tomb ere he dies, he shall live
thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care.
Draw it.
My griefs cry louder than advertisement.
Stand thee close, then, under this pent-house, for
wise, if Don Worm, his conscience, find no
comprehended two aspicious persons, and we would
Thou pure impiety and impious purity!
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
a Dutchman today, a Frenchman to-morrow, or in the
comes this night to Messina.
What would you with me, honest neighbour?
To-morrow then I will expect your coming,
And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart
Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your
And that is Claudio: I know him by his bearing.
the fleet: I would he had boarded me.
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
no more pains for those thanks than you took pains
She is so self-endeared.
Exit
I will owe thee an answer for that: and now forward
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
like my lady's eldest son, evermore tattling.
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
Why, then, depart in peace, and let the child wake
meantime, good Signior Benedick, repair to
earth. Would it not grieve a woman to be
They know that do accuse me, I know none:
How now, cousin Hero!
If it should give your age such cause of fear:
purpose that the world can say against it, and
More moving-delicate and full of life,
May be she doth but counterfeit.
hear of me, so think of me. Go, comfort your
get us some excellent music, for to-morrow night we
Let them be in the hands--
To be so moral when he shall endure
O Lord, my lord, if they were but a week married,
O, very well, my lord: the music ended,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
I'll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the
I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my
I say my prayers aloud.
Just, if he send me no husband, for the which
I have already delivered him letters, and there
Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
In faith, she's too curst.
her, rather than she will bate one breath of her
presently call the rest of the watch together and
What heard you him say else?
then, peace be with him.
But they shall find, awaked in such a kind,
No, but the barber's man hath been seen with him,
Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her!
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Go, then, find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and
allegiance, mark you this, on my allegiance. He is
Here, here comes master Signior Leonato, and the
ever was known in the commonwealth.
[Aside]  I know that Deformed, a' has been a vile
Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
I have almost matter enough in me for such an
Or, if thou wilt hold longer argument,
husband, if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.
Peace! I will stop your mouth.
I will disparage her no farther till you are my
and skirts, round underborne with a bluish tinsel:
No, truly not, although, until last night,
As she is prized to have--as to refuse
Perhaps is but prolong'd: have patience and endure.
What effects, my lord? She will sit you, you heard
you, to go in the song?
out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen and hang me
punishment. And also, the watch heard them talk of
she's a fair lady: I do spy some marks of love in
Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges
No, 'twas the vane on the house.
examined? let them come before master constable.
the very man. Here's his dry hand up and down: you
fantastical, the wedding, mannerly-modest, as a
But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedick,
Yea, and text underneath, 'Here dwells Benedick the
No, you shall pardon me.
Why, then we rack the value, then we find
more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any is in
Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of
I'll make her come, I warrant you, presently.
One Hero died defiled, but I do live,
Save in the office and affairs of love:
Never tell him, my lord: let her wear it out with
county. What fashion will you wear the garland of?
With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest
If either of you know any inward impediment why you
confess nothing, nor I deny nothing. I am sorry for my cousin.
We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.
thee for pity.
Than this for whom we render'd up this woe.
deservest it.
excellent wit? can virtue hide itself? Go to,
Do not you meddle, let me deal in this.
And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
Into his study of imagination,
you and dote upon the exchange.
this night in a dance: and if he found her
with thee to disgrace her.
That which appears in proper nakedness?
Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of
Stand thee by, friar. Father, by your leave:
Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.
that is an old man and no honester than I.
of your office, to be no true man, and, for such
own virtues, as I am to myself. So much for
Chid I for that at frugal nature's frame?
Ye light o' love, with your heels! then, if your
To have no man come over me! why, shall I always
that I think you are in love: nay, by'r lady, I am
that only tells a lie and swears it. I cannot be a
Is all of her, say that thou overheard'st us,
That is the sum of all, Leonato. Signior Claudio
And tire the hearer with a book of words.
Well, then, go you into hell?
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse
hear me call Margaret Hero, hear Margaret term me
Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this
Write down Prince John a villain. Why, this is flat
His excellence did earn it, ere he had it.
Masters,--
hereafter, and aim better at me by that I now will
Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
But few of any sort, and none of name.
That I love her, I feel.
the fire too. Come, talk not of her: you shall find
Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of
But now I am return'd and that war-thoughts
Enter DON PEDRO, CLAUDIO, BENEDICK, BALTHASAR, DON JOHN, BORACHIO, MARGARET, URSULA and others, masked
Do not swear, and eat it.
I will, lady.
Can labour ought in sad invention,
Exeunt HERO and URSULA
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography, his
matter: there's her cousin, an she were not
congregation, shame her with what he saw o'er night
Signior, you are very near my brother in his love:
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged
affection: it is past the infinite of thought.
late stood out against your brother, and he hath
Come, follow me, boy, come, sir boy, come, follow me:
I,' says she, 'that have so oft encountered him
Will you not tell me who told you so?
I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.
your eyes as other women do.
Trust not my reading nor my observations,
Upon the error that you heard debated:
all's done.
know me! The prince's fool! Ha? It may be I go
This says she now when she is beginning to write to
Than Venus, or those pamper'd animals
Having so swift and excellent a wit
should flout him, if he writ to me, yea, though I
Disloyal?
I make all use of it, for I use it only.
Dead, I think. Help, uncle!
I am a wise fellow, and, which is more, an officer,
will die, if he love her not, and she will die, ere
These gloves the count sent me, they are an
refused, and upon the grief of this suddenly died.
O, when she had writ it and was reading it over, she
becomes you, for, out of question, you were born in
And she alone is heir to both of us:
So turns she every man the wrong side out
So did I too, and he swore he would marry her to-night.
you are false knaves.
trim ones too: he is now as valiant as Hercules
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream,
if her breath were as terrible as her terminations,
Your daughter here the princes left for dead:
you for yourselves?
bear it for a difference between himself and his
A maid, and stuffed! there's goodly catching of cold.
hid in the garden.
thee the bucklers.
Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou
God match me with a good dancer!
He is of a very melancholy disposition.
No, no, we will hold it as a dream till it appear
I hope he be in love.
Cupid is no longer an archer: hi s glory shall be
God keep your ladyship still in that mind! so some
Who? the most exquisite Claudio?
Which was before barr'd up with ribs of iron!
One word, sir: our watch, sir, have indeed
You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this
meant, plain holy-thistle. You may think perchance
I look for an earthquake too, then.
Friendship is constant in all other things
I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.
with love than I will get again with drinking, pick
But if all aim but this be levell'd false,
I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair
Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and
Well, and you be not turned Turk, there's no more
SCENE I. A church.
Yes, in truth it is, sir.
Welcome, signior: you are almost come to part
piety, as shall be proved upon thee by good witness.
Indeed, neighbour, he comes too short of you.
I know that, but I would have thee hence, and here again.
In practise let us put it presently.
ecstasy hath so much overborne her that my daughter
There thou speak'st reason: nay, I will do so.
I can see yet without spectacles and I see no such
A third is fled, that had a hand in it.
honourable virtues.
And this is all.
What else, fellow?
gown that they praise so.
Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece,
We will not fail.
Gifts that God gives.
are in love or that you will be in love or that you
Who wrongs him?
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand:
Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
so.'
We will rather sleep than talk: we know what
And let my counsel sway you in this case.
she is virtuous.
And greedily devour the treacherous bait:
'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin, tis time you were
Is that she will not add to her damnation
And when please you to say so?
be a flattering honest man, it must not be denied
overjoyed with finding a birds' nest, shows it his
Fashion'd to Beatrice.
If it please you: yet Count Claudio may hear, for
like him as she is.
for God's sake: pray you, examine him upon that point.
We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken
beard is more than a youth, and he that hath no
If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.
And wish he had not so accused her,
that puts the world into her person and so gives me
and the old ornament of his cheek hath already
That know love's grief by his complexion!
arras, and there heard it agreed upon that the
The revellers are entering, brother: make good room.
Exit MARGARET
It is not seen enough, you should wear it in your
me, by my troth, it is no addition to her wit, nor
a whole bookful of these quondam carpet-mangers,
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
What's he?
before such villains! Masters, it is proved already
That rage in savage sensuality.
O God, sir, here's a dish I love not: I cannot
excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion,
I look'd upon her with a soldier's eye,
wars or no?
As strange as the thing I know not. It were as
but for the stuffing,--well, we are all mortal.
No, though he thought his accusation true.
I am here already, sir.
All put on their masks
Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth, it catches.
endings: no, I was not born under a rhyming planet,
Enter URSULA
have them this morning examined before your worship.
And a good soldier to a lady: but what is he to a lord?
sick, or angry?
kind of men, the less you meddle or make with them,
Wash'd it with tears? Hence from her! let her die.
I'll take my oath on it, till he have made an oyster
Why, then my cousin Margaret and Ursula
Officers, what offence have these men done?
not ever sad then, for I have heard my daughter say,
heavens, he shows me where the bachelors sit, and
man with wishing, therefore I will die a woman with grieving.
An he should, it were an alms to hang him. She's an
Yea, an 'twere a thousand pound more than 'tis, for
Not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that no
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed
Who smirch'd thus and mired with infamy,
Why, then your uncle and the prince and Claudio
Sexton too.
none but this.
Do it in notes.
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
I pray you, be not angry with me, madam,
Come, let us go. These things, come thus to light,
prince in the night, you may stay him.
name, accuse these men.
I would have salved it with a longer treatise.
Even to the next willow, about your own business,
and perturbation follows her.
O noble sir,
Exeunt
let the issue show itself.
One foot in sea and one on shore,
Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.
chamber-window, bids me a thousand times good
For I have only been silent so long
soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever
None, my lord.
I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoin'd
disdained of all than to fashion a carriage to rob
blind Cupid.
to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to be whipped.
SCENE I. Before LEONATO'S house.
all, dies for him.
woman: and so, I pray thee, call Beatrice: I give
Do you question me, as an honest man should do, for
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed,
The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel:
such shallow follies in others, become the argument
further warrant: go but with me to-night, you shall
I am sorry you must hear: upon mine honour,
And what have I to give you back, whose worth
So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.
And yet, to satisfy this good old man,
sixpence in earnest of the bear-ward, and lead his
Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.
will depart unkissed.
Can lay upon my sin: yet sinn'd I not
I know you well enough, you are Signior Antonio.
but I am a plain-dealing villain. I am trusted with
Get you some of this distilled Carduus Benedictus,
[Coming forward]  This can be no trick: the
they make you not then the better answer, you may
only his gift is in devising impossible slanders:
Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
All matter else seems weak: she cannot love,
'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.
Alas, poor hurt fowl! now will he creep into sedges.
up--to a contaminated stale, such a one as Hero.
You will never run mad, niece.
So would not I, for your own sake, for I have many
I am your husband, if you like of me.
I would have sworn it had, my lord, especially
know how she should be worthy, is the opinion that
Did he never make you laugh?
But mine and mine I loved and mine I praised
Enter DON JOHN
And never could maintain his part but in the force
offer them instances, which shall bear no less
Saying, I liked her ere I went to wars.
And that Count Claudio did mean, upon his words, to
And Hymen now with luckier issue speed's
Re-enter DON PEDRO
Is it possible that any villany should be so dear?
dishonesty shall appear in me.
In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.
be sworn, but love may transform me to an oyster, but
Goes foremost in report through Italy.
That I myself was to myself not mine,
Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what's the matter,
and make him my waiting-gentlewoman? He that hath a
indeed, for I love thee against my will.
love her, I am a Jew. I will go get her picture.
You have no reason, I do it freely.
Lady, will you walk about with your friend?
No, pray thee, good Meg, I'll wear this.
Gallants, I am not as I have been.
I am sure you know him well enough.
Misprising what they look on, and her wit
Yet say I, he is in love.
discovers it.
I will hold friends with you, lady.
planted and placed and possessed by my master Don
Here, man, I am at thy elbow.
Strike up, pipers.
must your daughter and her gentlewomen carry. The
ta'en you newly into his grace, where it is
that your grace had got the good will of this young
the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from
down an ass! But, masters, remember that I am an
for your favour, sir, why, give God thanks, and make
[Aside]  Some treason, masters: yet stand close.
am loved of all ladies, only you excepted: and I
scene that I would see, which will be merely a
He hath ta'en the infection: hold it up.
let it cool the while. I love Benedick well, and I
In every good thing.
the sensible Benedick's head?
Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.
burden: do you sing it, and I'll dance it.
believe,' said she, 'for he swore a thing to me on
That a woman conceived me, I thank her, that she
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword,
rhyme, for 'scorn,' 'horn,' a hard rhyme, for,
This is the end of the charge:--you, constable, are
marriage honourable in a beggar? Is not your lord
but hurt not.
As under privilege of age to brag
labour ill bestowed.
heart, for, truly, I love none.
myself, that I was the prince's jester, that I was
How dost thou, Benedick, the married man?
Note this before my notes,
after my custom, as being a professed tyrant to their sex?
praiseworthy: and now tell me, how doth your cousin?
Your silence most offends me, and to be merry best
Why, what's the matter?
Now, unto thy bones good night!
thank God you are rid of a knave.
the victory. I am sorry for her, as I have just
before the intended wedding,--for in the meantime I
Not now.
That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit
She shall be buried with her face upwards.
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
with a sad brow? or do you play the flouting Jack,
Have vanquish'd the resistance of her youth,
ACT III
Ha, no, no, faith, thou singest well enough for a shift.
thee to thy uncle's.
Come, let them be opinioned.
I found him here as melancholy as a lodge in a
Hugh Otecake, sir, or George Seacole, for they can
If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn.
If you spite it for my sake, I will spite it for
my grace. Rich she shall be, that's certain, wise,
have decreed not to sing in my cage. If I had my
Dost thou look up?
Claudio shall render me a dear account. As you
What secret hath held you here, that you followed
ACT II
Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.
Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.
Boys, apes, braggarts, Jacks, milksops!
Shall come apparell'd in more precious habit,
I am gone, though I am here: there is no love in
That would I know too: I warrant, one that knows him not.
But, as a brother to his sister, show'd
My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to
And you too, gentle Hero?
Shall be lamented, pitied and excused
This shame derives itself from unknown loins'?
The supposition of the lady's death
'Tis certain so, the prince wooes for himself.
withdrawn her father to break with him about it.
To link my dear friend to a common stale.
Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into
O, God defend me! how am I beset!
heaven, here's no place for you maids:' so deliver
strange dishes. May I be so converted and see with
thinking do not wrest true speaking, I'll offend
Come, Friar Francis, be brief, only to the plain
You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it:
To-morrow morning come you to my house,
Write down, master gentleman Conrade. Masters, do
I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
I took no more pains for those thanks than you take
believing old signs: a' brushes his hat o'
these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
Re-enter OTHELLO
Is the immediate jewel of their souls:
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe:
Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war
own world, and you might quickly make it right.
Whose messengers are here about my side,
Neither my place nor aught I heard of business
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.
Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right.
Enter OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, CASSIO, and Attendants
charity to my wit: do not think it so unwholesome.
There be some such, no question.
Sir, sir, sir,--
Enter EMILIA
Plague him with flies: though that his joy be joy,
Would ever have, to incur a general mock,
I am not sorry neither: I'ld have thee live,
Impudent strumpet!
Re-enter CASSIO, with him MONTANO and Gentlemen, servants following with wine
To bring you in again.
Speak, who began this? on thy love, I charge thee.
The world's a huge thing: it is a great price.
Should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt
they belie her. Lie with her! that's fulsome.
I cannot weep, nor answer have I none,
Ah balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Madam, good night, I humbly thank your ladyship.
That he is too familiar with his wife.
I have made my way through more impediments
Come, let us to the castle.
O Desdemona! Desdemona! dead!
till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
I can again thy former light restore,
He hath a daily beauty in his life
Kneels
They are close delations, working from the heart
And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.
O, yes, and went between us very oft.
Do you hear, Cassio?
I will do this, if I can bring it to any
For if such actions may have passage free,
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
With such accommodation and besort
woman indeed, one that, in the authority of her
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
To LODOVICO and GRATIANO
O murderous slave! O villain!
As in these cases, where the aim reports,
O! my fear interprets: what, is he dead?
The worst of words.
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
Which even now stand in act, that, for their souls,
I found it in my chamber:
'Twill out, 'twill out: I peace!
Call up her father,
provocation.
To leave me but a little to myself.
'Tis some mischance, the cry is very direful.
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
Heaven doth truly know it.
He's never any thing but your true servant.
He will not say so.
Behold her well, I pray you, look upon her:
And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
Alas, who knows?
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
I pray you, bring me on the way a little,
The heavens forbid
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes,
See Cassio wipe his beard with.
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment:
Who's that which rings the bell?--Diablo, ho!
With his free duty recommends you thus,
In double knavery--How, how? Let's see:--
How!
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Exit
his to her: it was a violent commencement, and thou
And let me the canakin clink, clink,
To have me filch it?
Good night.
lieutenant tonight watches on the court of
Iago is most honest.
Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,
I will bestow you where you shall have time
Even till we make the main and the aerial blue
Exit
Is't come to this? Well, well.
The Moor! I know his trumpet.
Is't possible, my lord?
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in's hand.
Every way makes my gain: live Roderigo,
Your power and your command is taken off,
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
She false with Cassio!--did you say with Cassio?
He is much changed.
Enter BIANCA
The death of Cassio to be undertook
You shall by that perceive him and his means:
Re-enter CASSIO, driving in RODERIGO
A man that languishes in your displeasure.
Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed!
May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
Be wise, and get you home.
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
had he done to you?
If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her
Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone!
O sweet England!
thou rather to be hanged in compassing thy joy than
Good morrow, good Lieutenant: I am sorry
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
What's the matter?
I will be found most cunning in my patience,
Of moving accidents by flood and field
As I do now: for whiles this honest fool
Ha! ha! false to me?
Are we turn'd Turks, and to ourselves do that
Very obedient. Proceed you in your tears.
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
It is too late.
importing the mere perdition of the Turkish fleet,
taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So
whisper: with as little a web as this will I
What is the matter? How now, general!
us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with
When it hath blown his ranks into the air,
To get good guard and go along with me.
Peace, you were best.
the master and main exercise, the incorporate
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
On most part of their fleet.
Nothing, but this is so.
And practising upon his peace and quiet
Than what he found himself was apt and true.
Avaunt! be gone! thou hast set me on the rack:
have no more of this, let's to our affairs.--Forgive
And laid good 'scuse upon your ecstasy,
Yes, a dozen, and as many to the vantage as would
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
A fellow almost damn'd in a fair wife,
Here is the man, this Moor, whom now, it seems,
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift,
Poor Desdemona! I am glad thy father's dead:
Marry, heaven forbid!
You rogue! you rascal!
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight,
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
Give me a taper! call up all my people!
It's the wind.
Light on the man! Come hither, gentle mistress:
The voice of Cassio: Iago keeps his word.
I saw the handkerchief.
By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped:
May trumpet to the world: my heart's subdued
I am not valiant neither,
That, I being absent and my place supplied,
I do repent me that I put it to you.
The Anthropophagi and men whose heads
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
And your unblest fate hies: strumpet, I come.
So, so, so, so: they laugh that win.
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
hate the Moor: my cause is hearted, thine hath no
'Tis better as it is.
Help, masters!--Here's a goodly watch indeed!
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
To be produced--as, if I stay, I shall--
Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's place,
And you of her, the bloody book of law
He held them sixpence all too dear,
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
Before me! look, where she comes.
Exit
IAGO from behind wounds CASSIO in the leg, and exit
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!
A good wench, give it me.
Nor set down aught in malice: then must you speak
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
With that he call'd the tailor lown.
Never pray more, abandon all remorse,
You, mistress,
At least into a jealousy so strong
A most unhappy one: I would do much
They rise
This is a trick to put me from my suit:
against him: if thou canst cuckold him, thou dost
advantage of hope. I will indeed no longer endure
What you would ask me, that I should deny,
I' faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
It is the very error of the moon,
Go to, say no more.
From one that so imperfectly conceits,
By Roderigo.
this instant to build on thee a better opinion than
It hath not appeared.
monarch? I should venture purgatory for't.
Out of his scattering and unsure observance.
And he shall our commission bring to you,
See for the news.
He calls me to a restitution large
I have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense,
the means I shall then have to prefer them, and the
And go with you.
Well, do your discretion.
Will you sup there?
Yet throw such changes of vexation on't,
Speak, for my heart is full.
May fall to match you with her country forms
I am desperate of my fortunes if they cheque me here.
Had it pleased heaven
Cassio, Cassio!
And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashier'd Cassio:
The worser that you give me the addition
[To OTHELLO]  What, in your own part, can you say to this?
throw it to.
I gave her such a one, 'twas my first gift.
That men must lay their murders on your neck.
In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience,
And many a civil monster.
Till that the nature of your fault be known
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips:
My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
He bears the sentence well that nothing bears
How is't with you?
I think so too.
You see this fellow that is gone before,
Madam, here comes my lord.
Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you
And pour our treasures into foreign laps,
She wish'd she had not heard it, yet she wish'd
Give't me again: poor lady, she'll run mad
And chides with thinking.
Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.
Give me a living reason she's disloyal.
Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frize,
O, falsely, falsely murder'd!
Exeunt
cats and blind puppies. I have professed me thy
have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst thou
How comes this trick upon him?
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!
And prays you to believe him.
together. Villanous thoughts, Roderigo! when these
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
He sups to-night with a harlotry, and thither will I
A Florentine more kind and honest.
Arise, I say.
Come hither, Moor:
O monstrous act!
Is free of speech, sings, plays and dances well,
Nay, that's not next.--Hark! who is't that knocks?
Thy husband.
A man he is of honest and trust:
Enter EMILIA
How now, my lord!
She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted
The duke and senators of Venice greet you.
have greater reason to believe now than ever, I mean
for she shall not live: no, my heart is turned to
Chaos is come again.
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Who, I, my lord?
Peace, and be still!
O, my good lord, yonder's foul murders done!
Past thought! What said she to you? Get more tapers:
and what delight shall she have to look on the
The fresh streams ran by her, and murmur'd her moans,
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
From any other foul unlawful touch
Exit RODERIGO
some to make bonfires, each man to what sport and
find itself abused, begin to heave the gorge,
My father gave my mother.
A thousand times committed, Cassio confess'd it:
stone, I strike it, and it hurts my hand. O, the
Most heathenish and most gross!
Exeunt
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
world hath not a sweeter creature: she might lie by
My thrice-driven bed of down: I do agnise
May she give that?
O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
If thou dost slander her and torture me,
Sing willow, willow, willow,
For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent
Committed! O thou public commoner!
after: a pestilent complete knave, and the woman
He begg'd of me to steal it.
I know not where is that Promethean heat
Exit EMILIA
Dost thou hear, my honest friend?
But he that filches from me my good name
with her needle: an admirable musician: O! she
And bring all Cyprus comfort!
Think on thy sins.
'Faith, that's with watching, 'twill away again:
As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives,
We lose it not, so long as we can smile.
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips
What dost thou mean?
Then would to God that I had never seen't!
And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole:
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
And so do I too, lieutenant.
She'ld come again, and with a greedy ear
Come, you are too severe a moraler: as the time,
O, a thousand thousand times: and then, of so
So they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip:
But seeming so, for my peculiar end:
And mark how he continues.
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.
I will catechise the world for him, that is, make
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
Even as our days do grow!
If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself!
What, do you shake at that?
More of this matter cannot I report:
And speed must answer it.
I find in hardness, and do undertake
Or by the worth of man's eternal soul,
For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.
a soldier.
Potations pottle-deep, and he's to watch:
Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own,
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
Fie!
I marry her! what? a customer! Prithee, bear some
The meat it feeds on, that cuckold lives in bliss
Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse!
It is a business of some heat: the galleys
If it be that--
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
That's not so good now.
O, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.
SCENE II. A room in the castle.
Ay, marry, are they, sir.
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
You have said now.
Swear thou art honest.
Lay by these:--
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Hark!
My husband!
But did you ever tell him she was false?
Whose want even kills me.
What? what?
Enter OTHELLO and EMILIA
Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confused:
Why, sweet Othello,--
Speak of me as I am, nothing extenuate,
That gives them credit.
'Tis probable and palpable to thinking.
Is that true? why, then Othello and Desdemona
As I am an honest man, I thought you had received
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds
so determinate as the removing of Cassio.
God be wi' you! I have done.
They are loves I bear to you.
Enter BRABANTIO, RODERIGO, and Officers with torches and weapons
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
And yet I fear you, for you are fatal then
To BRABANTIO
every man put himself into triumph, some to dance,
Why, stay, and hear me speak.
Keep leets and law-days and in session sit
Yet, for necessity of present life,
It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper:--
It were an honest action to say
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
here, Cassio,
To-morrow dinner, then?
I humbly thank your ladyship.
He'll watch the horologe a double set,
That turn'd your wit the seamy side without,
But kill him rather. I'll after that same villain,
an emperor's side and command him tasks.
Exit CASSIO
and dare not task my weakness with any more.
My leg is cut in two.
Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!
Hath puddled his clear spirit: and in such cases
In mouths of wisest censure: what's the matter,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
you and her husband entreat her to splinter, and, my
But with such general warranty of heaven
My mother had a maid call'd Barbara:
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
take me from this world with treachery and devise
[Within]  My lord , my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord!
Foul disproportion thoughts unnatural.
ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon
to the history of lust and foul thoughts. They met
What in the contrary?
SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the castle.
What trumpet is that same?
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Masters, play here, I will content your pains,
'Tis not a year or two shows us a man:
Not poppy, nor mandragora,
That make ambition virtue! O, farewell!
No, as I shall be saved.
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on--
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,
By heaven, I'll know thy thoughts.
of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a
Enter IAGO and RODERIGO
How is't, brother!
O,--Desdemona,--
This cannot be,
are drown'd.
She comes more nearer earth than she was wont,
She was a charmer, and could almost read
Am I to put our Cassio in some action
I will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me
ever before. Give me thy hand, Roderigo: thou hast
And bring them after in the best advantage.
This is his second fit, he had one yesterday.
Shall lose me. What! in a town of war,
As ignorant as dirt! thou hast done a deed--
but for bragging and telling her fantastical lies:
change for youth: when she is sated with his body,
Do themselves homage: these fellows have some soul,
suspicion is not without wit and judgment. But,
I do not know, I am sure I am none such.
As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say,
Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man:
SCENE II. A bedchamber in the castle: DESDEMONA in bed asleep,
Cry within: 'Help! help!'
He that is robb'd, not wanting what is stol'n,
I do beseech your lordship, call her back.
Montano and myself being in speech,
A natural and prompt alacrity
Concerning you.
How do you, Desdemona?
How now! what do you here alone?
Of such a thing as thou, to fear, not to delight.
But why should honour outlive honesty?
speak well enough.
Not now, sweet Desdemona, some other time.
It must needs wither: I'll smell it on the tree.
To be suspected, framed to make women false.
But the free comfort which from thence he hears,
Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon,
I have no judgment in an honest face:
The woman falls, sure, he hath kill'd his wife.
I think it doth: is't frailty that thus errs?
Against the Moor: for, I do know, the state,
o' the air.
Most grave Brabantio,
More than pertains to feats of broil and battle,
Had stomach for them all.
If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,
Come, come you talk.
Ay, ay: O, lay me by my mistress' side.
For he conjured her she should ever keep it,
'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
He, woman,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
You will be shamed for ever.
To bring him in! Trust me, I could do much,--
Roderigo!
disrelish and abhor the Moor, very nature will
I once more take my leave.
But not intentively: I did consent,
Who is't that cried!
For too much loving you.
You told a lie, an odious, damned lie,
To the health of our general!
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,
Concerning this, sir,--O  well-painted passion!--
Into the vale of years,--yet that's not much--
SCENE III. The garden of the castle.
That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
That thou hast practised on her with foul charms,
Dear general, I never gave you cause.
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
sport, there should be, again to inflame it and to
My noble lord--
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
Than twenty times your stop: but, O vain boast!
There's many a beast then in a populous city,
Enter DESDEMONA, CASSIO, and EMILIA
Exeunt
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
desire it.
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
No more of that. I pray you, in your letters,
No further harm.
What conjuration and what mighty magic,
Over my thigh, and sigh'd, and kiss'd, and then
Traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel,--
To give it her. I did so: and take heed on't,
O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell,
another, to make me frankly despise myself.
speak with you.
Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
To wrong'd Othello's service! Let him command,
My speculative and officed instruments,
But, O, what damned minutes tells he o'er
voice on you: you must therefore be content to
Once more, well met at Cyprus.
That never set a squadron in the field,
blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
With fresh suspicions? No, to be once in doubt
Swallow them up. Now, by yond marble heaven,
Will you think so?
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
They do not point on me.
I like the work well: ere it be demanded--
ACT II
As this that I have reach'd: for know, Iago,
the general's wife be stirring, tell her there's
Ay, there's the point: as--to be bold with you--
For every minute is expectancy
[To BIANCA]  What, look you pale? O, bear him out
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
You have known him long, and be you well assured
Why, why is this?
To fall in love with what she fear'd to look on!
Whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief--
When we do quicken. Desdemona comes:
My husband!
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
Is't lost? is't gone? speak, is it out
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
She was in love, and he she loved proved mad
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
I had rather to adopt a child than get it.
With that recognizance and pledge of love
What dost thou say, Iago?
Your mystery, your mystery: nay, dispatch.
Evades them, with a bombast circumstance
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil,
How have I been behaved, that he might stick
That dotes on Cassio, as 'tis the strumpet's plague
What tidings can you tell me of my lord?
Save that, they say, the wars must make examples
The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane,
Why, what art thou?
imports it.
All that's spoke is marr'd.
To search you out.
Not to-night, good Iago: I have very poor and
Lechery, by this hand, an index and obscure prologue
Robs me of that which not enriches him
Why, then, let a soldier drink.
I am sure, is sent for.
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
'Tis certain, then, for Cyprus.
I have none: do not talk to me, Emilia,
hath given it his whore.
It speaks against her with the other proofs.
civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing
'Tis a strange truth.
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
I am no strumpet, but of life as honest
Shall I deny you? no: farewell, my lord.
Exeunt DUKE OF VENICE, Senators, Officers,  and c
O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
They fight
Nay, if you strive--
See suitors following and not look behind,
Witness that here Iago doth give up
Singing
I hope you will consider what is spoke
To make this bitter to thee.
sir in. Very good, well kissed! an excellent
Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
The Moor is of a free and open nature,
To MONTANO, who is led off
As doth the raven o'er the infected house,
Ha! I like not that.
I will your serious and great business scant
the will. Come, be a man. Drown thyself! drown
should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away
By no assay of reason: 'tis a pageant,
Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!
Soliciting his wife: ay, that's the way
To follow still the changes of the moon
ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left:
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
You shall not write my praise.
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
To do this is within the compass of man's wit: and
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something:
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
She swore, in faith, twas strange, 'twas passing strange,
Alas, my lord, what do you mean by that?
I'll not believe't.
courtesy! 'tis so, indeed. Yet again your fingers
And nothing can or shall content my soul
They give their greeting to the citadel,
For, in my sense, 'tis happiness to die.
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
Guns heard
Bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens,
O, villain that I am!
But now, my lord.
Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There's a poor piece
and pulls me: ha, ha, ha!
So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me, so hales,
And wit depends on dilatory time.
What he might be: if what he might he is not,
Indeed, they are disproportion'd,
But that our loves and comforts should increase,
What do you mean by this haunting of me?
Cough, or cry 'hem,' if any body come:
If you please,
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortunes
I will deny thee nothing.
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starr'd wench!
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
That you unlace your reputation thus
And in the essential vesture of creation
Ha!
Much castigation, exercise devout,
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
Retires
The lethargy must have his quiet course:
is now the general: may say so in this respect, for
At this odd-even and dull watch o' the night,
At blow and thrust, even as again they were
Or breed itself so out of circumstance,
To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,
As friendly as you were.
Signior, it is the Moor.
For others' uses. Yet, 'tis the plague of great ones,
With one of an ingraft infirmity:
Nay, good lieutenant,
Not this hour, lieutenant, 'tis not yet ten o' the
It is Brabantio. General, be advised,
drunk, he sweats not to overthrow your Almain, he
How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair!
she will find the error of her choice: she must
For I'll refer me to all things of sense,
He went hence but now,
Hold your hands,
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
'Tis true, most worthy signior,
The Moor already changes with my poison:
'Faith, I have heard too much, for your words and
And mine, a hundred and forty.
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find him,
Throwing restraint upon us, or say they strike us,
For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
He falls on the bed
Alas, poor rogue! I think, i' faith, she loves me.
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
My lord, you know I love you.
I am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra,
beneficial news, it is the celebration of his
A liberal hand: the hearts of old gave hands,
Kissing her
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow'd my daughter?
I'll send for you anon. Sir, I obey the mandate,
Of a night-brawler? give me answer to it.
Rouse him: make after him, poison his delight,
To eat us hungerly, and when they are full,
near nobody.
The gravity and stillness of your youth
He call'd her whore: a beggar in his drink
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
Amen to that, sweet powers!
What say you?
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
Exeunt DESDEMONA and EMILIA
Why, with my lord, madam.
But let her live.
Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago:
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
No, unpin me here.
To assist my simpleness.
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Do not think, gentlemen. I am drunk: this is my
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
Soft, by and by. Let me the curtains draw.
This is the night
Makes a pass at CASSIO
Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.
And I did give't my husband.
'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death:
I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain:
Nor the division of a battle knows
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
How, sir, how!
Re-enter DESDEMONA, attended
You were best go in.
Exit IAGO
more delicate way than drowning. Make all the money
I will not stay to offend you.
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
Say you?
How now, my dear Othello!
Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,
With that which he hath drunk to-night already,
O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was
Two or three groan: it is a heavy night:
Nay, this was but his dream.
I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter
O grace! O heaven forgive me!
You charge me most unjustly.
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
He supp'd at my house, but I therefore shake not.
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
unprovide my mind again: this night, Iago.
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Nay, good lieutenant,--alas, gentlemen,--
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
That there be women do abuse their husbands
Seeing you coming.
What place? what time? what form? what likelihood?
Drunk!
Light, I say! light!
Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie.
Within these three days let me hear thee say
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn:
Despise me, if I do not. Three great ones of the city,
Men should be what they seem,
The handkerchief!
O heavy ignorance! thou praisest the worst best.
'Twere now to be most happy, for, I fear,
We'll wait upon your lordship.
Even from the east to the west!
Is he not jealous?
What's the matter with thee now?
The general and his wife are talking of it,
In one of those same sheets.
And sing it like poor Barbara. Prithee, dispatch.
Even as her appetite shall play the god
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
revels his addiction leads him: for, besides these
Whate'er you be, I am obedient.
shalt see an answerable sequestration:--put but
Some one way, some another. Do you know
Than their bare hands.
none, why, none: a slipper and subtle knave, a
O, help me here!
'Faith, half asleep.
O, beware, my lord, of jealousy,
What will you do with 't, that you have been
engines for my life.
Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio,
'Zounds, sir, you're robb'd, for shame, put on
the issue?
I do entreat that we may sup together:
you, Cassio? is he not a most profane and liberal
Farewell, for I must leave you:
It does abhor me now I speak the word,
Sing all a green willow:
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
Due reference of place and exhibition,
O, help!
My soul hath her content so absolute
can be filled.
Enter a fourth Gentleman
A drop of patience: but, alas, to make me
not very well: nay, I think it is scurvy, and begin
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,
And your reports have set the murder on.
Than give thy cause away.
To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail,
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so
Come, go with me apart, I will withdraw,
Send for the man, and ask him.
Than with your weapons.
will not, come when you are next prepared for.
to your English.
I know, Iago,
Ha!
O monstrous! monstrous!
As partly I find it is, that your fair daughter,
A passion most unsuiting such a man--
[Within]  What, ho! what, ho! what, ho!
Have not devised this slander, I'll be hang'd else.
Well, thou dost best.
He comes to bad intent.
But though they jump not on a just account,--
O villain!
That livest to make thine honesty a vice!
Players in your housewifery, and housewives' in your beds.
Let me be thought too busy in my fears--
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
And loyal wife.
Whip me, ye devils,
O most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn
Some horrible conceit: if thou dost love me,
The rites for which I love him are bereft me,
have brought you from Venice. Watch you to-night,
Indeed! is't true?
shall hear more by midnight.
I greet thy love,
And there will I be with him. So, farewell.
Farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content!
So would not I	my love doth so approve him,
For, if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
O heavens forfend!
And give't Iago: what he will do with it
Pale as thy smock! when we shall meet at compt,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
And sweet revenge grows harsh.
A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements:
As I have spoken for you all my best
I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
counsellor?
flattery, not out of my promise.
Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter:
That hold their honours in a wary distance,
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice:
Be sure of it, give me the ocular proof:
Most humbly therefore bending to your state,
the health of black Othello.
I had been happy, if the general camp,
Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night:
When you yourself did part them.
wilt thou do this?
What profane wretch art thou?
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more:
[Aside to RODERIGO]  Away, I say, go out, and cry a mutiny.
And she died singing it: that song to-night
Out of the way, that your converse and business
Ay.
Why, what's the matter?
Say it, Othello.
Where most you owe obedience?
Sir, I will answer any thing. But, I beseech you,
Not Cassio kill'd! then murder's out of tune,
Away!
Make head against my estimation!
Did he confess it?
If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife:
The handkerchief!
But never more be officer of mine.
She was false as water.
To win the Moor--were't to renounce his baptism,
Tell me, Othello: I wonder in my soul,
Are at the duke's already: you have been
And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of drunkards,
Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.
And it is still itself.
Look, here it is.
That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst
O, 'tis foul in her.
to him again, and he's yours.
I'll intermingle every thing he does
I'll pour this pestilence into his ear,
Whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong side out,
Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon:
What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so
On, good Roderigo: I'll deserve your pains.
directly in love with him.
Long live she so! and long live you to think so!
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
'Tis pitiful, but yet Iago knows
isle of Cyprus and our noble general Othello!
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Or that I do not yet, and ever did.
Whom I with all the office of my heart
of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to
Nor purposed merit in futurity,
Worse and worse.
Do you perceive in all this noble company
With Cassio's suit: therefore be merry, Cassio,
And new-create this fault?
But, for the handkerchief,--
What, have you lost your wits?
It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of
A knave teach me my duty!
Have I to-night fluster'd with flowing cups,
What, is he angry?
She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
Come, swear it, damn thyself
Michael, good night: to-morrow with your earliest
I could not sleep.
Come, come,
No, not to-night.
I am very sorry that you are not well.
He hath, and is again to cope your wife:
return again to Venice.
What will I do, thinkest thou?
This is thy work: the object poisons sight,
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see't?
As nothing else could match.
Re-enter IAGO, with a light
That she was false: O, she was heavenly true!
Oh! Oh! Oh!
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I'll speak.
Ay, I do.
Did not you hear a cry?
To kiss and talk to. I'll have the work ta'en out,
'Tis pride that pulls the country down,
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head.
For when my outward action doth demonstrate
Know him! ay.
'Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.
And call thy husband hither.
give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favour,
You heard her say herself, it was not I.
sympathy in years, manners and beauties, all which
He's almost slain, and Roderigo dead.
I will not.
I know not, sweet: I found it in my chamber.
What,
Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures and light behavior,
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,
The native act and figure of my heart
The one's for use, the other useth it.
[Aside to him]  How now, Roderigo!
He's married.
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?
That Cassio's not alive.
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Call up my brother. O, would you had had her!
Sings
drowning thyself! it is clean out of the way: seek
No, let me not.
I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
Never, my lord.
Being done, there is no pause.
In sooth, you are to blame.
I found by fortune and did give my husband,
Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Exit RODERIGO
He runs at IAGO  IAGO, from behind, stabs EMILIA, and exit
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself
When this advice is free I give and honest,
You'll never meet a more sufficient man.
Good friend, go to him, for, by this light of heaven,
gives your Hollander a vomit, ere the next pottle
That I have passed.
O, sir, content you,
My husband say that she was false!
But, notwithstanding, with my personal eye
Your honour is most welcome.
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,
The desperate tempest hath so bang'd the Turks,
News, friends, our wars are done, the Turks
And often did beguile her of her tears,
Even fall upon my life.
Enter a Herald with a proclamation, People following
the Moor is defective in: now, for want of these
In simple and pure soul I come to you.
But, sith I am enter'd in this cause so far,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
Pride, pomp and circumstance of glorious war!
In any honest suit: she's framed as fruitful
pregnant and unforced position--who stands so
I say thy husband: dost understand the word?
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
Re-enter EMILIA
And did forsake her: she had a song of 'willow,'
Beshrew him for't!
To try me with affliction, had they rain'd
Since guiltiness I know not, but yet I feel I fear.
These may be counterfeits: let's think't unsafe
And, till she come, as truly as to heaven
[Going]  My lord, I take my leave.
your swag-bellied Hollander--Drink, ho!--are nothing
Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!
O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four
SCENE III. A hall in the castle.
With all my heart.
Either from Venice, or some unhatch'd practise
Retire thee, go where thou art billeted:
Nay, that's certain: but yet the pity of it, Iago!
Enter DESDEMONA, EMILIA, and Clown
Marry, heaven forbid!
My lord?
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
She was a wight, if ever such wight were,--
Dull not device by coldness and delay.
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor:
knave is handsome, young, and hath all those
Wrench his sword from him.
Boding to all--he had my handkerchief.
she kept it,
I am for it, lieutenant, and I'll do you justice.
I have this while with leaden thoughts been press'd:
Why, how should she be murder'd?
As honest as I am.
I ne'er saw this before.
Found in his pocket too, and this, it seems,
For I have lost us him on a dangerous sea.
And, I'll warrant her, fun of game.
Or came it by request and such fair question
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
O weary reckoning!
you're drunk.
Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Thy bed, lust-stain'd, shall with lust's blood be spotted.
To EMILIA
If she in chains of magic were not bound,
A soldier's a man,
The DUKE and Senators sitting at a table, Officers attending
Dismiss me!
or thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which
Am I that name, Iago?
Show me thy thought.
If my offence be of such mortal kind
I am hitherto your daughter: but here's my husband,
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
And you shall be satisfied.
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
Sometimes intrude not? who has a breast so pure,
I might do't as well i' the dark.
her that's foul and foolish?
What dost thou say?
Why, whose is it?
O devil, devil!
And makes men mad.
O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood!
O mistress, villany hath made mocks with love,
instruct her in it and compel her to some second
Without more wider and more overt test
Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
As husbands have. What is it that they do
With who?
I think my wife be honest and think she is not,
Dost thou prate, rogue?
Fire and brimstone!
If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,
of this to-morrow. Adieu.
They draw on both sides
'Tis well I am found by you.
Of some such thing?
And all indign and base adversities
Alas, what cry is that?
I cannot give it vital growth again.
requisites in him that folly and green minds look
'Faith, I must, she'll rail in the street else.
'Faith, he to-night hath boarded a land carack:
craftily qualified too, and, behold, what innovation
To see you here before me. O my soul's joy!
SCENE I. Cyprus. A street.
Still as the grave. Shall she come in? were't good?--
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards,
The general were put in mind of it.
Even like thy chastity. O cursed slave!
seems to cast water on the burning bear,
Nay, that's not your way.
But now I find I had suborn'd the witness,
For the same handkerchief?
'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That's fouler.
I am a very villain else.
merit, did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself?
Go to, woman!
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant?
How I did thrive in this fair lady's love,
In such gross kind?
So opposite to marriage that she shunned
Yes, presently:
What handkerchief?
Heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks,
I will chop her into messes: cuckold me!
Alas my friend and my dear countryman
I am to find you thus: I have been to seek you.
His soul is so enfetter'd to her love,
Are you not a strumpet?
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse
Nay, but be wise: yet we see nothing done,
I am glad on't, 'tis a worthy governor.
And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
Beat me!
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
Exit
I am about it, but indeed my invention
For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith,
I prithee, name the time, but let it not
And not by old gradation, where each second
forthwith: dismiss your attendant there: look it be done.
I ne'er might say before. When I came back--
Transported, with no worse nor better guard
The gutter'd rocks and congregated sands--
He's gone, but his wife's kill'd.
Where is that viper? bring the villain forth.
She that was ever fair and never proud,
That she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit:
With his weak function. How am I then a villain
What may you be? are you of good or evil?
Than to suspicion.
Those are the raised father and his friends:
Christian and heathen, must be be-lee'd and calm'd
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
hanged, and then to confess.--I tremble at it.
To love the Moor.
That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
I am not merry, but I do beguile
Exit Clown
May unfold me to him, there stand I in much peril:
Ay, there, look grim as hell!
And yet his trespass, in our common reason--
An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.
I'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience,
Come, Desdemona: I have but an hour
And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Not?
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona,
Of years, of country, credit, every thing,
Here, at thy hand: be bold, and take thy stand.
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
Of very expert and approved allowance,
To be direct and honest is not safe.
Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.
Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
So, get thee gone, good night Ate eyes do itch,
[Reads]  'This fail you not to do, as you will--'
To send in to your wife: my suit to her
But the main article I do approve
I do not understand.
But never taint my love. I cannot say 'whore:'
And it is thought abroad, that 'twixt my sheets
She said so: I must needs report the truth.
Prithee, say true.
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,
For nought but provender, and when he's old, cashier'd:
You are a fool, go to.
Why, this is not a boon,
Will you hear't again?
How goes it now? he looks gentler than he did.
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me,
To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy
But jealous for they are jealous: 'tis a monster
A housewife that by selling her desires
Richer than all his tribe, of one whose subdued eyes,
She that in wisdom never was so frail
Probal to thinking and indeed the course
I prithee, let thy wife attend on her:
Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.
In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
My husband!
Be not enshelter'd and embay'd, they are drown'd:
Leave procreants alone and shut the door,
To fortune's alms.
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
Why did he so?
have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse,
How to respect you, you are the lord of duty,
Something from Cyprus as I may divine:
Puff'd his own brother:--and can he be angry?
You must forsake this room, and go with us:
--Handkerchief--confessions--handkerchief!--To
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
Be not acknown on 't, I have use for it.
Are there no stones in heaven
Lend me thy handkerchief.
I'll send her to you presently,
that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say, I
One of this kind is Cassio:
Is nought but bitterness. Now, Roderigo,
Within 'A sail, a sail!' Guns heard
Do you see, gentlemen? nay, guiltiness will speak,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal:
Give renew'd fire to our extincted spirits
How this foul rout began, who set it on,
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
My lord, I say! Othello!
Shore his old thread in twain: did he live now,
And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.
Who is thy lord?
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
Signior, is all your family within?
SCENE II. A room in the castle.
Take it, and do't, and leave me for this time.
Ha! wherefore?
As you that thus abuse me.
Iago, my reputation!
How now, good Cassio! what's the news with you?
Well, I must leave her company.
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
And love thee after. One more, and this the last:
O insupportable! O heavy hour!
to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
Rot half a grain a day! he lies to the heart:
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Draws, and wounds RODERIGO
A maiden never bold,
With what else needful your good grace shall think
That weaken motion: I'll have't disputed on,
Striking RODERIGO
me, I will show you such a necessity in his death
and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden
He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain
I will but spend a word here in the house,
not make her husband a cuckold to make him a
I should make very forges of my cheeks,
And fearful to be granted.
Did you by indirect and forced courses
He hath, my lord, but be you well assured,
Exit
What handkerchief?
Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
Off-capp'd to him: and, by the faith of man,
Fetch Desdemona hither.
When I shall turn the business of my soul
Never, my lord.
O my fair warrior!
Even on the instant.
he hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and
All my abilities in thy behalf.
That is a fault.
Fetch't, let me see't.
Hold! the general speaks to you, hold, hold, for shame!
It was my hint to speak,--such was the process,
O gentle lady, do not put me to't,
Lead him off.
My life and education both do learn me
Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchanted her,
Down, strumpet!
They belch us. Look you, Cassio and my husband!
That she reserves it evermore about her
How now, Roderigo!
Ay. Desdemona.
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons:
And he himself confess'd but even now
So was I bid report here to the state
Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,
my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of
nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be
With Desdemona alone.
And what's to come of my despised time
He did not call, he's busy in the paper.
Is not to leave't undone, but keep't unknown.
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave,
She never yet was foolish that was fair,
And by him do my duties to the senate:
What, not to pray?
His bark is stoutly timber'd, his pilot
No, his mouth is stopp'd,
I meet the captains at the citadel.
Dies
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know,
Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples,
less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge
Your officer, Iago, can inform you,--
Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
No, I hear not your honest friend, I hear you.
'Faith, that was not so well, yet would I knew
of his salt and most hidden loose affection? why,
I think I can discover him, if you please,
known to Desdemona: if she will return me my
What make you from home?
Than answer my waked wrath!
I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout:
Have with you.
And, lo, the happiness! go, and importune her.
God be wi' you, take mine office. O wretched fool.
Ay, 'twas he that told me first:
Hang her! I do but say what she is: so delicate
My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him,
Exeunt OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, and Attendants
Stood in your action.
We do not know.
He speaks well.
And, in conclusion,
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
An unkind breach: but you shall make all well.
performances are no kin together.
To the Venetian state. Come, bring him away.
Re-enter RODERIGO
Silence that dreadful bell: it frights the isle
CASSIO and RODERIGO are borne off
He did, from first to last: why dost thou ask?
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!
What are you here that cry so grievously?
SCENE I. Before the castle.
[Rising]  O, she was foul!
Enter a Messenger
Give me some help.
Away at once with love or jealousy!
She loved me for the dangers I had pass'd,
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus,
And what was he?
money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in
Though tongues were out of use.
Steps in to Cassio, and entreats his pause:
A closet lock and key of villanous secrets
If thou but think'st him wrong'd and makest his ear
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
How now, Cassio!
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n,
This very night at one another's heels,
What is the matter, ho? who is't that cried?
I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel,
O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
If you bethink yourself of any crime
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Begot upon itself, born on itself.
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
of gold for thee: if the gentlewoman that attends
He thought 'twas witchcraft--but I am much to blame,
Cassio, my lord! No, sure, I cannot think it,
Went he hence now?
Wherein the toged consuls can propose
To put my father in impatient thoughts
their brains! that we should, with joy, pleasance
The shot of accident, nor dart of chance,
[To EMILIA]  Some of your function, mistress,
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
And nothing of a man.
And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
SCENE II. Another street.
What, now?
There are a kind of men so loose of soul,
This is some token from a newer friend:
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
I should have found in some place of my soul
Their medicinal gum. Set you down this,
And makes me poor indeed.
She has deceived her father, and may thee.
Did Michael Cassio, when you woo'd my lady,
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows
Touch me not so near:
one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech:
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed, which I
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
What needs this iteration, woman? I say thy husband.
Now here's another discontented paper,
spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by,
If it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever.
graces: confess yourself freely to her, importune
He says he will return incontinent:
To the platform, masters, come, let's set the watch.
it makes here: I am unfortunate in the infirmity,
Nay, heaven doth know.
Is foul as slander.
But this denoted a foregone conclusion:
And have not those soft parts of conversation
I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,
Exist, and be a member of his love
And no conception nor no jealous toy
Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom.
It is impossible they bear it out.
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
Where are they?
None in the world, nor do I know the man.
therefore I will attempt the doing it.
The world hath noted, and your name is great
So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear
I pray you, after the lieutenant, go.
That paragons description and wild fame,
I thus would play and trifle with your reverence:
Well, my good lady.
Lay not your blame on me: If you have lost him,
I will not.
I here do give thee that with all my heart
Look, where he comes.
Take up this mangled matter at the best:
not mark that?
If I court moe women, you'll couch with moe men!
To prison, till fit time
What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,
To seal her father's eyes up close as oak-
Out, strumpet! weep'st thou for him to my face?
may strike at you: provoke him, that he may, for
Here, my lord.
My lord, what is your will?
I understand a fury in your words.
Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane dead
Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her!
Exeunt OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, and Attendants
To DESDEMONA
To beguile many and be beguiled by one:
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers:
What name, fair lady?
Blow me about in winds! roast me in sulphur!
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
To you I am bound for life and education,
Are you sure of that?
Sweet soul, take heed,
I cry you mercy. Here's Cassio hurt by villains.
Exit Gentleman
But they are cruel tears: this sorrow's heavenly,
Here at the door, I pray you, call them in.
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
deserving: you have lost no reputation at all,
Thieves! thieves!
If I do vow a friendship, I'll perform it
[To IAGO]  O Spartan dog,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Good, good: the justice of it pleases: very good.
Of all that I do know: nor know I aught
Olympus-high and duck again as low
To have him see me woman'd.
again: but, as they say to hear music the general
o' the way?
Exit
Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Re-enter second Gentleman
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?
Exit
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan.
Do not you chide, I have a thing for you.
Exeunt
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
Belief of it oppresses me already.
There comes a fellow crying out for help:
With meditations lawful?
Delighted them in any other form,
Her salt tears fell from her, and soften'd the stones,
And hath in his effect a voice potential
Enter CASSIO and some Musicians
He, sir.
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?
'Fore God, an excellent song.
Get you to bed on the instant, I will be returned
When violence assails us.
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
Be't at her father's.
What's the matter, lieutenant?
And he does chide with you.
That he hath used thee.
Save you, worthy general!
In sleep I heard him say 'Sweet Desdemona,
Why, then, to-morrow night, or Tuesday morn,
Exit above
I pray you, pardon me, I cannot speak.
moved my lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,
To vouch this, is no proof,
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse:
It is too true an evil: gone she is,
serve God, if the devil bid you. Because we come to
Enter CASSIO and IAGO
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
That I extend my manners, 'tis my breeding
beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is
O, that's an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,
The servants of the duke, and my lieutenant.
Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.
I won his daughter.
Enter CASSIO
And tell my lord and lady what hath happ'd.
Out of my sight!
Which I have here recover'd from the Moor:
The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,
Come, my dear love,
Pray you, come in,
you not. I'll not be far from you: do you find
What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?
Doth that bode weeping?
That so neglected you.
I cannot, 'twixt the heaven and the main,
Saints m your injuries, devils being offended,
questions, and by them answer.
'Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword: he dies.
I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.
Good signior, you shall more command with years
that to him now is as luscious as locusts, shall be
And, being troubled with a raging tooth,
Unfit for mine own purposes.
Against your honour
As, I confess, it is my nature's plague
What a full fortune does the thicklips owe
Will you go on? I pray.
With foul and violent tempest.
What promise, chuck?
Hath leap'd into my seat, the thought whereof
And have you mercy too! I never did
Enter IAGO
You have not been a-bed, then?
Than in a polite distance.
I am your own for ever.
Emilia run you to the citadel,
You'll have enough.
For 'tis a damned slave.
An you'll come to supper to-night, you may, an you
it in your chamber, and not know who left it there!
Is't possible?
purse. If thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a
To cure him of this evil--But, hark! what noise?
I pray you, sir, go forth,
Succeeds in unknown fate.
'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
Enter OTHELLO, IAGO, and Gentlemen
You or any man living may be drunk! at a time, man.
'Tis very good, I must be circumstanced.
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Nor to comply with heat--the young affects
Parted our fellowship--But, hark! a sail.
Here is her father's house, I'll call aloud.
This wretch hath part confess'd his villany:
coursers for cousins and gennets for germans.
I pray you, sir, hold your hand.
Two things are to be done:
I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,
What was he that you followed with your sword? What
Not I, for this fair island:
I ran it through, even from my boyish days,
Will not go from my mind, I have much to do,
Horribly stuff'd with epithets of war,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Hast stol'n it from her?
Nobody, I myself. Farewell
Yes, that I did, but that was but courtesy.
What did thy song bode, lady?
an erring barbarian and a supersubtle Venetian not
certain Venetians, and thither comes the bauble,
Well, what is it? is it within reason and compass?
Subdue him at his peril.
Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands:
Is once to be resolved: exchange me for a goat,
Nay, lay thee down and roar,
Should yawn at alteration.
Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor
I have been talking with a suitor here,
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
I crave fit disposition for my wife.
are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in
With her, on her, what you will.
Why, would not you?
That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear.
I had forgot thee: O, come in, Emilia,
I do believe 'twas he.
As asses are.
My daughter is not for thee, and now, in madness,
That Rhodes is dress'd in: if we make thought of this,
For she is with me: no, when light-wing'd toys
a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men
King Stephen was a worthy peer,
But for a satisfaction of my thought,
Sure, there's some wonder in this handkerchief:
Should fear to seize thee: therefore be double damn'd:
The thoughts of people: she told her, while
By Signior Angelo.
Thou said'st, it comes o'er my memory,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
I nothing but to please his fantasy.
As when, by night and negligence, the fire
That's he that was Othello: here I am.
Kill me to-morrow: let me live to-night!
You would be satisfied?
In me defunct--and proper satisfaction.
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
you may take him at your pleasure: I will be near
Prithee, hie thee, he'll come anon:--
You have little cause to say so.
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?
The better shall my purpose work on him.
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor--
Holla! stand there!
If drink rock not his cradle.
Excellent well.
hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is
As where's that palace whereinto foul things
Do you go back dismay'd? 'tis a lost fear,
Assays to lead the way: if I once stir,
Help, ho!--Lieutenant,--sir,--Montano,--sir,
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again
But I shall, in a more continuate time,
unhappy brains for drinking: I could well wish
would drown myself for the love of a guinea-hen, I
And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?
But if you know not this, my manners tell me
Iago,--
O murderous coxcomb! what should such a fool
Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve,-
Blush'd at herself, and she, in spite of nature,
She is stirring, sir: if she will stir hither, I
Most fortunately: he hath achieved a maid
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
With such things else of quality and respect
And, to the advantage, I, being here, took't up.
Every day thou daffest me with some device, Iago,
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.
Write from us to him, post-post-haste dispatch.
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
to lie in mine own throat.
Seek him, bid him come hither: tell him I have
Exeunt all but IAGO and CASSIO
And his unbookish jealousy must construe
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
How now, my sweet Bianca! how now! how now!
Prerogatived are they less than the base,
Where shall we meet i' the morning?
it, nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace what
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
I pray you, be content, 'tis but his humour:
That chamberers have, or for I am declined
By debitor and creditor: this counter-caster,
For I am nothing, if not critical.
Good night to every one.
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners,
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
He puts the handkerchief from him, and it drops
And die in music.
The one as long as the other: 'tis pity of him.
It is not lost, but what an if it were?
That may offend the isle.--But here they come:
Stand ranks of people, and they cry 'A sail!'
If imputation and strong circumstances,
Then Lord have mercy on me!
She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,
Cannot with safety cast him, for he's embark'd
taken against me a most just exception, but yet, I
And looks not on his evils: is not this true?
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
To BIANCA
Are your doors lock'd?
I'll tear her all to pieces.
Exit
It is impossible you should see this,
Villany, villany, villany!
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs:
Enwheel thee round!
Welcome, mistress.
That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!
Thou art rash as fire, to say
Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
My noble father,
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl:
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs,
Or I'll knock you o'er the mazzard.
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
At Rhodes, at Cyprus and on other grounds
What then?
Good faith, a little one, not past a pint, as I am
I do not know: friends all but now, even now,
That their designment halts: a noble ship of Venice
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love,
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on't.
My lord?
Were he in favour as in humour alter'd.
To tell it o'er: go to, well said, well said.
Does tire the ingener.
thee often, and I re-tell thee again and again, I
Your wife, my lord, your true
What bloody business ever.
Exit EMILIA
Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love,
[Within]  What, ho! my lord, my lord!
It is a judgment maim'd and most imperfect
I have it not about me.
Do, good my friend.
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
with idleness, or manured with industry, why, the
Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance
Of spirit so still and quiet, that her motion
Are these, I pray you, wind-instruments?
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used
What, keep a week away? seven days and nights?
confess, and be hanged for his labour,--first, to be
Men do their broken weapons rather use
And is in full commission here for Cyprus.
Look in my face.
I fear the trust Othello puts him in.
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
What is the matter there?
I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with
He has done my office: I know not if't be true,
There is besides in Roderigo's letter,
By being in his eye. Most gracious duke,
Stabs himself
I know his gait, 'tis he.--Villain, thou diest!
My speech should fall into such vile success
Let it go all.
Your sword upon a woman?
I would not have thee linger in thy pain: So, so.
Fie, there is no such man, it is impossible.
And portance in my travels' history:
Into your favour.
That's one of them.
That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee
Yet, I beseech you,
Think so, Iago!
Take heed of perjury, thou art on thy deathbed.
I'ld not have sold her for it.
love to the Moor,-- put money in thy purse,--nor he
And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,
Who having, by their own importunate suit,
the soldier than in the scholar.
you'll have your nephews neigh to you, you'll have
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
Iago, look with care about the town,
foolish woman your wife! she gave it him, and he
Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,
Hath ta'en your part, to have so much to do
A fine woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman!
That dwell in every region of his face,
I would on great occasion speak with you.
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel:
Good madam, do: I warrant it grieves my husband,
ne'er been born!
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see:
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
to second your attempt, and he shall fall between
That makes me ugly, and, besides, the Moor
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
I say, amen.
What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst
Marry. sir, by many a wind-instrument that I know.
Offend you in my life, never loved Cassio
Enter RODERIGO
I will a round unvarnish'd tale deliver
and rather, as it seems to me now, keepest from me
Honest! ay, honest.
That passion cannot rule.
If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why,
For 'tis of aspics' tongues!
However this may gall him with some cheque,
mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes
I will hear further reason for this.
Alas the heavy day! Why do you weep?
Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed.
Of one entire and Perfect chrysolite,
After new fancies: she, dying, gave it me,
Exeunt OTHELLO and DESDEMONA
That was my wife's?
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain,
Nay, stare not, masters: it is true, indeed.
As hell's from heaven! If it were now to die,
Why, no, the day had broke
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,
Of hair-breadth scapes i' the imminent deadly breach,
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
And when she seem'd to shake and fear your looks,
I am very glad to see you, signior
her help to put you in your place again: she is of
O, pardon me: 'twill do me good to walk.
Here, stand behind this bulk, straight will he come:
Or stand so mammering on. What! Michael Cassio,
Willow, willow, willow,--
And passion, having my best judgment collied,
Exit CASSIO
No, 'faith, she let it drop by negligence.
I'ld whistle her off and let her down the wind,
I'll not endure it. Would I were satisfied!
I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that was
On Tuesday noon, or night, on Wednesday morn:
That shall enmesh them all.
Sing willow, willow, willow:
is stabbing.
Ay, but not yet to die.
Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
Hold, for your lives!
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding
Where a malignant and a turban'd Turk
To who?
And put in every honest hand a whip
Will you hear me, Roderigo?
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
That there he dropp'd it for a special purpose
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place
Nor I, I would not there reside,
I would you had never seen him!
Falls in a trance
Go, leave me.
I care not for thy sword, I'll make thee known,
Why do you speak so faintly?
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago,
And she did gratify his amorous works
Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.
Enter DESDEMONA, IAGO, and Attendants
Exit CASSIO
My daughter! O, my daughter!
The immortal Jove's dead clamours counterfeit,
And let her speak of me before her father:
Hark!
Ha!
For I attend here: but I'll see you soon.
The small'st opinion on my least misuse?
so likes your music, that he desires you, for love's
As fit the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,
Not out of absolute lust, though peradventure
Hum!
sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer
Be near at hand, I may miscarry in't.
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
And yet, how nature erring from itself,--
that you shall think yourself bound to put it on
What is the reason of this terrible summons?
Even then this forked plague is fated to us
Even he, sir, did you know him?
To lip a wanton in a secure couch,
O Iago!
then have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.
go, vanish into air, away!
Even to the very quality of my lord:
A sequester from liberty, fasting and prayer,
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb--
'Twas I that kill'd her.
It is not honesty in me to speak
Are you not well?
conclusion, Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me: I
And so she did.
Set on thy wife to observe: leave me, Iago:
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus
Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,
No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.
Whether I in any just term am affined
Justice to break her sword! One more, one more.
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Out, and alas! that was my lady's voice.
The very head and front of my offending
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
These sentences, to sugar, or to gall,
My lord, for aught I know.
I should but teach him how to tell my story.
A fixed figure for the time of scorn
A frank one.
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home:
For thus deluding you.
For this was brief--I found them close together,
Exit
Fetch me the handkerchief: my mind misgives.
us our sins!--Gentlemen, let's look to our business.
Of here and every where. Straight satisfy yourself:
'I have already chose my officer.'
And may: but, how? how satisfied, my lord?
Will you come to bed, my lord?
If it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea,
So please your grace, my ancient,
And I--God bless the mark!--his Moorship's ancient.
if it be well used: exclaim no more against it.
This is Othello's ancient, as I take it.
Something from Venice, sure. 'Tis Lodovico
I did full hard forbear him. But, I pray you, sir,
She that being anger'd, her revenge being nigh,
It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and
I kiss'd thee ere I kill'd thee: no way but this,
In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst 'Indeed!'
That I did love the Moor to live with him,
Which lead directly to the door of truth,
most blessed condition.
Prithee, no more: let him come when he will,
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
Leave you! wherefore?
For the whole world.
You are--a senator.
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
My advocation is not now in tune,
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,
Emilia, come. Be as your fancies teach you,
Stay you, good gentlemen. Look you pale, mistress?
to waste: about it.
not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? didst
Nor send you out o' the way?
The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief,
I will so. What's the matter?
No.
Do well thrive by them and when they have lined
No, in good troth, Bianca.
For nature so preposterously to err,
Or scant our former having in despite,
Then heaven
It is hypocrisy against the devil:
But that belike Iago in the interim
It must not be: if Cassio do remain,
Exeunt MONTANO and GRATIANO
And this may help to thicken other proofs
Singing
Going
It were not for your quiet nor your good,
If heaven would make me such another world
Good my lord, pardon me:
Are tricks of custom, but in a man that's just
O, they are our friends, but one cup: I'll drink for
Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe
If partially affined, or leagued in office,
Ay, madam.
Why, go to bed, and sleep.
Which I first gave her, I saw it in his hand:
Ha, ha, ha!
As like enough it will--I'ld have it copied:
As worthy cause I have to fear I am--
I have't. It is engender'd. Hell and night
Soft you, a word or two before you go.
As doth import you.
Enter LODOVICO. MONTANO, CASSIO carried in a chair, and Officers with IAGO, prisoner
That I may save my speech: do but go after,
To show the love and duty that I bear you
Exit
she is sport for Jove.
So justly to your grave ears I'll present
I scarce did know you, uncle: there lies your niece,
To find out practises of cunning hell,
How is't with you, my lord
our wills are gardeners: so that if we will plant
I'll be with thee betimes.
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
Both you of my inclining, and the rest:
Why, then, I think Cassio's an honest man.
Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
I must show out a flag and sign of love,
proclaimed. All offices are open, and there is full
Due to the Moor my lord.
I am to blame.
Is my lord angry?
Behold her topp'd?
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
Staying him
Some wine, ho!
Or made gift of it, my father's eye
I am changed: I'll go sell all my land.
For I will make him tell the tale anew,
The goodness of the night upon you, friends!
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me,
For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.
Bade him anon return and here speak with me,
To lose't or give't away were such perdition
Come, let's do so:
No, indeed, my lord.
ACT V
Though I should swear I saw't: 'tis very much:
Exeunt Musicians
To bear him easily hence!
Without a prompter. Where will you that I go
Lady, amen.
Ay, sooth, so humbled
Not a jot, not a jot.
Enter MONTANO, GRATIANO, IAGO, and others
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight
My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy:
For such things in a false disloyal knave
Is it his use?
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
I think this tale would win my daughter too.
If it be that, or any that was hers,
At nine i' the morning here we'll meet again.
Of feather'd Cupid seal with wanton dullness
Exit
'Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not
How is it, general? have you not hurt your head?
That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter,
Enter OTHELLO, IAGO, and Attendants with torches
Come on assay. There's one gone to the harbour?
Come, guard the door without, let him not pass,
Enter LODOVICO and GRATIANO
Trust me, I am glad on't.
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Entirely to her love, but if she lost it
Here is more news.
Of love, of worldly matters and direction,
You may, indeed, say so,
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
What, did they never whisper?
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
After her, after her.
Tying her duty, beauty, wit and fortunes
Ay, past all surgery.
A trumpet within
A chair brought in
They do discharge their shot of courtesy:
Now, if this suit lay in Bianco's power,
I'll have some proof. Her name, that was as fresh
Do not rise yet.
Or with some dram conjured to this effect,
Now do I see 'tis true. Look here, Iago,
Solicit for it straight.
In night, and on the court and guard of safety!
My life upon her faith! Honest Iago,
O good Iago,
Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so,
I will deny thee nothing:
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
Enter OTHELLO and IAGO
Enter CASSIO
'Tis but so, I warrant.
Why, any thing:
Exeunt
O, who hath done this deed?
But jealous souls will not be answer'd so,
lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. Let's
hath found him already.
Will you walk, sir?
My services which I have done the signiory
My name is Roderigo.
What sense had I of her stol'n hours of lust?
fustian with one's own shadow? O thou invisible
good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?
Bounteous madam,
A segregation of the Turkish fleet:
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
Save you, friend Cassio!
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
What dost thou think?
To answer this your charge?
Wear your eye thus, not jealous nor secure:
How now, my lord!
Do with so good a woman?
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.
This likewise is a friend.
Thou know'st we work by wit, and not by witchcraft,
How if fair and foolish?
fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.
Not to affect many proposed matches
As I! foh! fie upon thee!
O thou Othello, thou wert once so good,
She'll find a white that shall her blackness fit.
A very handsome man.
Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet!
Whereto we see in all things nature tends--
cannot be that Desdemona should long continue her
But not the words.
But if I give my wife a handkerchief,--
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
Villanous whore!
Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence,
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm!
Hold, ho! Lieutenant,--sir--Montano,--gentlemen,--
To start my quiet.
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
But, Othello, speak:
Ha, ha, ha!
Will give you satisfaction, you may have't.
Lie--
No, he must die. But so: I hear him coming.
O, thereby hangs a tail.
'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio's death.--
But that you do not love me.
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
I give thee warrant of thy place: assure thee,
From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes,
Steep'd me in poverty to the very lips,
A life's but a span,
sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a
courtesy would invent some other custom of
It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood,
jewels, I will give over my suit and repent my
Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble
I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.
To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where I lie.
What's the matter?
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
As soul to soul affordeth?
Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other,
If she be in her chamber or your house,
Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,
With nought but truth. I have wasted myself out of
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!--
Exeunt
done. Marry, I would not do such a thing for a
Is not this man jealous?
but, since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.
Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,
Enter BRABANTIO, OTHELLO, IAGO, RODERIGO, and Officers
That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
That will confess perfection so could err
We have done our course, there's money for your pains:
Who's there? whose noise is this that ones on murder?
Repair there to me.
Exeunt IAGO and Attendants
stings, our unbitted lusts, whereof I take this that
I will not leave him now till Cassio
grapes: if she had been blessed, she would never
After some time, to abuse Othello's ear
Enter CASSIO
Pray heavens he be,
Would Desdemona seriously incline:
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
Yet be content.
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
have a stoup of wine, and here without are a brace
She's a most exquisite lady.
Either for her stay or going: the affair cries haste,
purse, follow thou the wars, defeat thy favour with
Has had most favourable and happy speed:
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
As if some planet had unwitted men--
Why, now I see there's mettle in thee, and even from
Cried 'Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!'
And did you see the handkerchief?
Does challenge much respect. Come, Desdemona,
O damn'd Iago! O inhuman dog!
She was here even now, she haunts me in every place.
I think upon't, I think: I smell't: O villany!--
It's true, good lieutenant.
My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.
Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come,
Farewell the neighing steed, and the shrill trump,
lodging and say he lies here or he lies there, were
To put him to ill thinking.
Look to your house, your daughter and your bags!
Now, by heaven,
The great contention of the sea and skies
That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
I think it is: and doth affection breed it?
O, blood, blood, blood!
My lord?
Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
And I loved her that she did pity them.
But men are men, the best sometimes forget:
A stranger to thy thoughts.
I'll tell you what you shall do. Our general's wife
I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
For the sea's worth. But, look! what lights come yond?
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
Never.
And Cassio high in oath, which till to-night
If 'twere no other--
Would! nay, I will.
As the free elements. And then for her
Shall't be to-night at supper?
I that am cruel am yet merciful,
beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me:
What noise?
For often, with a solemn earnestness,
A messenger from the galleys.
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
Exeunt
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
mutiny, whose qualification shall come into no true
If this be known to you and your allowance,
I do perceive here a divided duty:
Are you a man? have you a soul or sense?
For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
It makes us, or it mars us, think on that,
'Tis oft with difference--yet do they all confirm
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
Which they dare swear peculiar: your case is better.
My lord, I see you're moved.
Good sir, be a man,
What I can do I will, and more I will
How do you mean, removing of him?
Well.
respect and acquaintance, but I find none.
To lead their business: in which regard,
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
Re-enter EMILIA with IAGO
Enter BIANCA
Her father and her country and her friends,
Look in upon me then and speak with me,
Do you withdraw yourself a little while,
I am maim'd for ever. Help, ho! murder! murder!
For mine own part,--no offence to the general, nor
Enter a Sailor
'Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.
Ay, but, by your leave, not before me, the
To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
In fearful sense.
Look, where he comes!
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs:
But ever puny whipster gets my sword:
O the pernicious caitiff!
Prithee, come, will you?
The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets
Upon some present business of the state
For Michael Cassio,
Came in and satisfied him.
Enter Clown
And bid me, when my fate would have me wive,
Speak within door.
Nay, stay: thou shouldst be honest.
Take hold on me, for my particular grief
As Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black
And loses that it works for.
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
And will not hear it. What committed!
He stifles her
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more,
If that thou best a devil, I cannot kill thee.
Note, if your lady strain his entertainment
Procure me some access.
No, by my life and soul!
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
Shared dangers with you,--
I think it freely, and betimes in the morning I will
That married with Othello.
[Returning]  My lord, I would I might entreat
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
Or put upon you what restraint and grievance
That! what?
Enter OTHELLO, LODOVICO, DESDEMONA, EMILIA and Attendants
It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
Bell rings
And give direction: and do but see his vice,
That she repeals him for her body's lust,
I would not kill thy unprepared spirit,
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
What is the news?
Come, hold your peace.
Now, what's the business?
Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you:
And certainly in strange unquietness.
His present reconciliation take,
There's matter in't indeed, if he be angry.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
Why, there's no remedy, 'tis the curse of service,
Quick, quick, fear nothing, I'll be at thy elbow:
You advise me well.
Dies
Fled from her wish and yet said 'Now I may,'
To do no contrived murder: I lack iniquity
Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead,
O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,
Let loose on me the justice of the state
Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly,
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
Enter RODERIGO and IAGO
Pray, chuck, come hither.
contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and
'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep:
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
Is he not honest?
mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now?
They dare not show their husbands, their best conscience
Enter IAGO
As if the case were his.
May be more free.
Indeed!
To get his place and to plume up my will
'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.
And on the proof, there is no more but this,--
Take me this work out.
Why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this?
In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks
As you shall prove us, praise us.
That not another comfort like to this
would change my humanity with a baboon.
Mistress!
What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!
Let it alone. Come, I'll go in with you.
I would to heaven he were!
almost spent, I have been to-night exceedingly well
'Faith, I intend so.
Excellent good.
Descry a sail.
Like a full soldier. Let's to the seaside, ho!
So much I challenge that I may profess
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
Patience, good sir.
Something that's brief, and bid 'Good morrow, general.'
Good Brabantio,
But half an hour!
Go in, and weep not, all things shall be well.
O me, lieutenant! what villains have done this?
If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties,
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
If you have any music that may not be heard, to't
Torments will ope your lips.
Honest Iago hath ta'en order for't.
I was a fine fool to take it. I must take out the
His breeches cost him but a crown,
No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress,
By me that's said or done amiss this night,
BRABANTIO appears above, at a window
And thou art but of low degree:
What is the matter?
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general.
said he then?
other course you please, which the time shall more
O, fie upon thee, slanderer!
And shut myself up in some other course,
Fear not my government.
Man but a rush against Othello's breast,
unlawful solicitation, if not, assure yourself I
If I would time expend with such a snipe.
So speaking as I think, I die, I die.
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves,'
Welcome to Cyprus.
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
Enter DESDEMONA, EMILIA, IAGO, RODERIGO, and Attendants
O Desdemona! away! away! away!
And ever will--though he do shake me off
Call'd Roderigo.
Most veritable, therefore look to't well.
By heaven, he echoes me,
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
What, my lord?
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes:
No, Cassio is not kill'd.
guard:--first, I must tell thee this--Desdemona is
Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain,
Yet do I hold it very stuff o' the conscience
Then take thine auld cloak about thee.
to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida. She must
Kissing her
Comes from my love. But I do see you're moved:
Have you pray'd to-night, Desdemona?
I humbly thank you for't.
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger,
How! the duke in council!
Any beginning to this peevish odds,
From men of royal siege, and my demerits
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
It cannot be.
Ancient, what makes he here?
Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits,
Look, how he laughs already!
that he hath devoted and given up himself to the
Why, how now, general! no more of that.
Why, go to then,
O treacherous villains!
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true,
Wounds IAGO
There's no man happy, the purest of their wives
Exit
How say you by this change?
For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Send for the lady to the Sagittary,
Nay, but he prated,
nettles, or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up
Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.
favourably minister.
What, ho! no watch? no passage? murder! murder!
That can thy light relume. When I have pluck'd the rose,
Each syllable that breath made up between them.
friend and I confess me knit to thy deserving with
And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor
I would not my unhoused free condition
And let the labouring bark climb hills of seas
But to go hang my head all at one side,
I am glad of it, for now I shall have reason
thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed,
Marry, to--Come, captain, will you go?
And, noble signior,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
He's a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies,
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk:
Pray heaven it be state-matters, as you think,
Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
I see this hath a little dash'd your spirits.
I will be hang'd, if some eternal villain,
Please it your grace, on to the state-affairs:
To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there,
Lend me a garter. So. O, for a chair,
Shapes faults that are not--that your wisdom yet,
She's the worse for all this.
Is topping your white ewe. Arise, arise,
He will recover straight: when he is gone,
She may, I think, bestow't on any man.
Alas, alas!
I never knew woman love man so.
I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Pardon me, Bianca:
Could neither graze nor pierce?
SCENE IV. Before the castle.
He shall in strangeness stand no further off
I am much bound to you.
Who they should be that have thus many led you?
That handkerchief
Does't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee.
Indeed!
Give him defence against the elements,
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation,
Is he well shipp'd?
The sooner, sweet, for you.
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake:
Exit
To point his slow unmoving finger at!
indiscreet an officer. Drunk? and speak parrot?
O, no, he goes into Mauritania and takes away with
Another of his fathom they have none,
Though it be fit that Cassio have his place,
shall seem to notify unto her.
It yet hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Roderigo kill'd!
Exeunt
Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon'd,
SCENE I. A Sea-port in Cyprus. An open place near the quay.
The fountain from the which my current runs,
And many of the consuls, raised and met,
Commend me to my kind lord: O, farewell!
It is my wretched fortune.
Our other healthful members even to that sense
crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before.
I have done the state some service, and they know't.
And here another: the one of them imports
An instrument of this your calling back,
O wretched villain!
that they speak i' the nose thus?
From this time forth I never will speak word.
to the devil wrath, one unperfectness shows me
The Moor's abused by some most villanous knave,
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her.
Here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!
Enter MONTANO and two Gentlemen
When Cassio left my wife: what didst not like?
Why, man?
And mine, two hundred:
[Within]  I do beseech you
Exeunt
Or else dries up, to be discarded thence!
For I have served him, and the man commands
I pray you, hear her speak:
They have it very oft that have it not:
Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away
That the magnifico is much beloved,
Get me some poison, Iago, this night: I'll not
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
And keep the gate of hell!
I look down towards his feet, but that's a fable.
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance:
too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what
Why the wrong is but a wrong i' the world: and
It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place,
my means. The jewels you have had from me to
Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
And little of this great world can I speak,
She's, like a liar, gone to burning hell:
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
conscionable than in putting on the mere form of
'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,
Lest by his clamour--as it so fell out--
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets: remember,
Mine's not an idle cause: the duke himself,
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
Exeunt
Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul,
And cannot make away.
This accident is not unlike my dream:
shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by
In compliment extern, 'tis not long after
He wrought upon her.
May be the letter moved him,
All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,
But to know so must be my benefit,
That even his stubbornness, his cheques, his frowns--
been better you had not kissed your three fingers so
Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?
Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast,
Go to: where lodges he?
Is't come to this?
Can any thing be made of this?
You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I
How now! who has put in?
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
And bade me to dismiss you.
I heard thee say even now, thou likedst not that,
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes
And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.
If you do find me foul in her report,
present itself, a devilish knave. Besides, the
I never gave it him: send for him hither,
Enter OTHELLO
she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more
Trumpets within
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!
Farewell the plumed troop, and the big wars,
With him! why, 'tis not possible.
Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care
But what serve for the thunder?--Precious villain!
Still question'd me the story of my life,
O, behold,
And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit,
Not I	what are you?
He might not but refuse you, but he protests he loves you
Who steals my purse steals trash, 'tis something, nothing,
Music
I have another weapon in this chamber,
But partly led to diet my revenge,
Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing
That done, I will be walking on the works,
and the Moor are now making the beast with two backs.
For they succeed on you. To you, lord governor,
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this,
They are all but stomachs, and we all but food,
Yes, sir, I have indeed.
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Cassio's a proper man: let me see now:
Exit
Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind!
As gifts to Desdemona,
Confine yourself but in a patient list.
I think that thou art just and think thou art not.
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again!
ACT IV
And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker: you
Of more arrivance.
If not, he foams at mouth and by and by
I think she stirs again:--no. What's best to do?
Out of self-bounty, be abused, look to't:
Men's natures wrangle with inferior things,
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
No, as I am a Christian:
If't be your pleasure and most wise consent,
thou silly gentleman!
And I a heavy interim shall support
natures more than is native to them--list me. The
If ever I did dream of such a matter, Abhor me.
Your napkin is too little:
Are his wits safe? is he not light of brain?
O Cassio, whence came this?
O my dear Cassio! my sweet Cassio! O Cassio,
He might have chid me so, for, in good faith,
I'll not have it so.
Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand?
Welcome, Iago, we must to the watch.
I may command at most. Get weapons, ho!
The duke's in council and your noble self,
Of being taken by the insolent foe
Dead?
Honest Iago, that look'st dead with grieving,
'Tis such another fitchew! marry a perfumed one.
Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopp'd:
To take the safest occasion by the front
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
But--dost thou hear?--most bloody.
Out of their best--is not almost a fault
How do you, madam? how do you, my good lady?
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom
your gown,
I took by the throat the circumcised dog,
Amen, with all my heart!
Entirely honour: I would not be delay'd.
Nonsuits my mediators, for, 'Certes,' says he,
Yours by this hand: and to see how he prizes the
I will incontinently drown myself.
That do demonstrate thinly.
An honourable murderer, if you will,
For, as I think, they do command him home,
Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?
And heaven defend your good souls, that you think
As proofs of holy writ: this may do something.
SCENE III. Another room In the castle.
And, like the devil, from his very arm
Full of crusadoes: and, but my noble Moor
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.
Roderigo! no:--yes, sure: O heaven! Roderigo.
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
Iago? O, I am spoil'd, undone by villains!
That e'er our hearts shall make!
Enter EMILIA
Truly, I think they are.
Rub him about the temples.
I am glad to see you mad.
From him that fled some strange indignity,
hotly call'd for,
Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost
O fool! fool! fool!
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
Falls
My noble lord,--
She give it Cassio! no, alas! I found it,
Fall'n in the practise of a damned slave,
patent to offend, for, if it touch not you, it comes
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
Some wine, boys!
[Advancing]  How shall I murder him, Iago?
Stabs RODERIGO
It is so too: and have not we affections,
These present wars against the Ottomites.
Let's teach ourselves that honourable stop,
than she is requested: this broken joint between
I know this act shows horrible and grim.
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
Hark, how these instruments summon to supper!
We must not think the Turk is so unskilful
Cry 'O sweet creature!' and then kiss me hard,
What would you with her, sir?
[Striking her]  Devil!
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?
'Tis truly so.
And I dare think he'll prove to Desdemona
Save you your labour. He that lies slain
Singing
For you, mistress,
For a small vice.
A horned man's a monster and a beast.
I'll set her on,
If I do die before thee prithee, shroud me
Breaks out to savage madness. Look he stirs:
Aside
For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too--
I'll love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus.--Goats and monkeys!
Heaven knows, not I,
I think thou dost,
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,
Devesting them for bed, and then, but now--
Patience, I say, your mind perhaps may change.
And happily repent.
I cry you mercy, then:
Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona
How didst thou know 'twas she? O she deceives me
be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
She that, so young, could give out such a seeming,
Should hazard such a place as his own second
Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
The very elements of this warlike isle,
For here's a young and sweating devil here,
Prithee, unpin me,--have grace and favour in them.
The messengers of Venice stay the meat,
Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
And will return to Venice. Hence, avaunt!
For I mine own gain'd knowledge should profane,
O misery!
The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,
As my young mistress' dog. Now, my sick fool Roderigo,
Well, go to, very well.
stands, I could heartily wish this had not befallen,
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
To speak your bosom freely.
I would have him nine years a-killing.
too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell, thou
Enter OTHELLO and IAGO
devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of
What, of Venice?
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
Against the general enemy Ottoman.
What tell'st thou me of robbing? this is Venice,
To kiss in private?
thyself a pleasure, me a sport. There are many
So may he with more facile question bear it,
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
He hath confess'd.
Think, my lord!
Good ancient, you are welcome.
Nor I neither by this heavenly light,
But they must blab--
For even her folly help'd her to an heir.
In following him, I follow but myself,
Exceed three days: in faith, he's penitent,
A se'nnight's speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
Why of thy thought, Iago?
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
so near with their lips that their breaths embraced
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot,
Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,
There is no other way, 'tis she must do't:
O perjured woman! thou dost stone my heart,
If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
O, did he so? I charge you, go with me.
As well to see the vessel that's come in
And yet she'll kneel and pray, I have seen her do't.
and will she love him still for prating? let not
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,
Upon malicious bravery, dost thou come
Make it a darling like your precious eye,
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.
What hath he said?
To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
Ay, my lord.
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Call thee to answer.
I pray you, turn the key and keep our counsel.
Dost thou say so?
O, the more angel she,
their wills: fill thy purse with money:--the food
Holds his soul light, he dies upon his motion.
That, with the little godliness I have,
'Las, what's the matter? what's the matter, husband?
I'll see before I doubt, when I doubt, prove,
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad,
If haply you my father do suspect
I know our country disposition well,
That's strange.
I do not like the office:
I pray, talk me of Cassio.
Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dress'd.
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
That death's unnatural that kills for loving.
Perplex'd in the extreme, of one whose hand,
her, do, I will gyve thee in thine own courtship.
Put into circumscription and confine
For to deny each article with oath
Lives, sir.
The ship is here put in,
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
O, but I fear--How lost you company?
That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man!
O, is that all? What will you give me now
Nay, yet there's more in this:
And thus she is deliver'd.
Let me see your eyes,
These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope,
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.
Exeunt DESDEMONA and EMILIA
Why, very well then, you must not think then that I am drunk.
More tedious than the dial eight score times?
For making him egregiously an ass
Nobody come? then shall I bleed to death.
Sing willow, willow, willow,
Yes: 'tis Emilia. By and by. She's dead.
myself, and what remains is bestial. My reputation,
I never did like molestation view
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Enter OTHELLO
To hang clogs on them. I have done, my lord.
For my free speech! you must awhile be patient:
Re-enter DESDEMONA and EMILIA
the place, and the condition of this country
And smooth as monumental alabaster.
Knavery's plain face is never seen tin used.
To bring them to that prospect: damn them then,
A guiltless death I die.
Lo, where he comes!
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
to depute Cassio in Othello's place.
scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the
Are to the jealous confirmations strong
Do you intend it?
to most preposterous conclusions: but we have
a light burning.
I am glad at soul I have no other child:
Which wrought to his desire.
For sure, he fills it up with great ability,
Nay, in all confidence, he's not for Rhodes.
opportunity.
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
To BRABANTIO
I say, it is not lost.
Of pain: nay, we must think men are not gods,
By what you see them act. Is there not charms
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
Will shake this island.
Dangerous conceits are, in their natures, poisons.
IAGO offers to stab EMILIA
I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one,
It stops me here, it is too much of joy:
Of law and course of direct session
Re-enter Iago
Well, sir, we will not.
In the due reverence of a sacred vow
I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin,
That policy may either last so long,
Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned to-night,
Here is my journey's end, here is my butt,
you.
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
What are you there? come in, and give some help.
He's that he is: I may not breathe my censure
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
Dost thou mock me?
What is she?
We are very sorry for't.
Re-enter CASSIO
Thou art no soldier.
Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on
Myself will straight aboard: and to the state
Moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel Moor,
What from the cape can you discern at sea?
Let him confess a truth.
Why, I have lost him too.
gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty
Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
Enter RODERIGO
An old thing 'twas, but it express'd her fortune,
I know't, I thank you. You do love my lord:
Aside
Did an Egyptian to my mother give,
Upon a soldier's thigh: I have seen the day,
Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,
O thou dull Moor! that handkerchief thou speak'st of
As levels with her breeding.
That can torment him much and hold him long,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee:
What is the matter here?
I would not have your free and noble nature,
I am sorry to hear this.
News, lads! our wars are done.
I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men!
I did not think
And what's the third?
Spaniard's mouth so watered, that he went to bed to
To give my tongue that heat to ask your help,
So buxom, blithe, and full of face,
As yon grim looks do testify.
Of whence you are, your name and parentage.
Having call'd them from the deep! O, still
Be't when she weaved the sleided silk
Walk, and be cheerful once again, reserve
Neither is our profession any trade, it's no
handsome fellow! Come, thou shalt go home, and
And though it was mine own, part of my heritage,
Lychorida, our nurse, is dead:
whom I am bound to.
Enter two or three Gentlemen
Sorrow were ever razed and testy wrath
Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them,
The music there!--I pray you, give her air.
Awake, and tell thy dream.
Ay, traitor.
Enter ANTIOCHUS, Prince PERICLES, and followers
From first to last resolve you.
Diana's temple is not distant far,
Our woes into the air, our eyes do weep,
He reads the riddle
what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her
Of Pericles the careful search,
To learn of me, who stand i' the gaps to teach you,
But are you flesh and blood?
To fair Marina, but in no wise
When you caught hurt in parting two that fought:
Look to the lady, O, she's but o'erjoy'd.
Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a
Do as I bid you, or you'll move me else.
No, friend, cannot you beg? Here's them in our
But custom what they did begin
Speaks nobly of her.
That doth frequent your house.
Slack the bolins there! Thou wilt not, wilt thou?
You'll turn a child again.
Can you remember what I call'd the man?
than to be beadle. But, master, I'll go draw up the
And harbourage for ourself, our ships, and men.
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts,
The o'erpress'd spirits. I heard of an Egyptian
Sleeps
lovers: seldom but that pity begets you a good
And call'd Marina?
O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord,
That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost
Sail seas in cockles, have an wish but for't,
We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on.
I have been in many, but such a night as this,
Would win some words of him.
Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,
And on her virgin honour will not break it.
Sir,
To make the world to laugh at me.
marvel how the fishes live in the sea.
And Pericles, in sorrow all devour'd,
Our men be vanquish'd ere they do resist,
Riding, her fortunes brought the maid aboard us,
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder,
come, come.
And his device, a wreath of chivalry,
And on set purpose let his armour rust
Do appear, to make the world twice rich. Live,
I thought as much.
So sharp are hunger's teeth, that man and wife
Whereby I see that Time's the king of men,
You make more rich to owe?
am out of the road of rutting for ever.
I shall with aged patience bear your yoke.
Which was when I perceived thee--that thou camest
Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane,
Will in that kingdom spend our following days:
fasting-days, and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks,
But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt
Because he should have swallowed me too: and when I
To whom I give my benison,
The name
Even in your armours, as you are address'd,
The leafy shelter that abuts against
Who attends us there?
snowball, saying his prayers too.
Will offer night-oblations to thee. Thaisa,
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
From honourable sources.
Boult, has she any qualities?
A most virtuous princess.
And tell me how it works.
Here they're but felt, and seen with mischief's eyes,
Her inkle, silk, twin with the rubied cherry:
The heavens,
Exeunt, carrying her away
On thee I lay whose wisdom's strength can bear it.
But time hath rooted out my parentage,
Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies,
That bears recovery's name. But, since your kindness
I mother, wife, and yet his child.
If put upon you, make the judgment good
At Tarsus, and by Cleon train'd
if in our youths we could pick up some pretty
A figure of truth, of faith, of loyalty:
O'er, point by point, for yet he seems to doubt,
So, this was well ask'd,'twas so well perform'd.
look after it.
If you were born to honour, show it now,
No?
Make such unquiet, that the ship
Her parentage, being demanded that,
Of monstrous lust the due and just reward:
Wilt live, fly after: and like an arrow shot
To evil should be done by none:
The mutiny he there hastes t' oppress,
As our intents will need?
Thrown upon this shore. I oped the coffin,
A crew of pirates came and rescued me,
In glittering golden characters express
I life would wish, and that I might
And it pierces and sharpens the stomach. Come,
Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.
Exeunt
To seek her as a bed-fellow,
Therefore hear you, mistress, either frame
fetch thee with a wanion.
Patience, good sir,
O, stop there a little!
For comfort is too far for us to expect.
And strangers ne'er beheld but wondered at,
something to do with you. Come, you're a young
Re-enter BOULT
Such strong renown as time shall ne'er decay.
SCENE IV. Tyre. A room in the Governor's house.
Now, Lychorida!
Becoming well thy fact: what canst thou say
The gods of Greece protect you!
is, she shall be ploughed.
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
Together with my practise, made familiar
[Aside]  How well this honest mirth becomes their labour!
Enter GOWER
Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!
The eyes of young and old. Care not for me
To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter's, call
I am no viper, yet I feed
And with a dropping industry they skip
I thank thee for't: my shipwreck now's no ill,
With your fine fancies quaintly eche:
No visor does become black villany
wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal
Re-enter Second and Third Fishermen, drawing up a net
Gentlemen,
net.
Must in your child be thought on. If neglection
Protest my ears were never better fed
Immortal Dian!
And if that ever my low fortune's better,
I thank him.
He had need mean better than his outward show
I'll hear you more, to the bottom of your story,
came her like in Mytilene.
And will awake him from his melancholy.
must comfort you, men must feed you, men must stir
'Twas very strange.
If there be such a dart in princes' frowns,
A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.
Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,
had been in his belly, I would have kept such a
Enter GOWER
Why, sir, say if you had,
I grant it: pray, but be not tedious,
Re-enter BOULT, with the Pirates and MARINA
She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should have been,
Is not this strange?
Fair one, all goodness that consists in bounty
I'll show you those in troubles reign,
Which is but cold, inflaming love i' thy bosom,
Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house,
Why, are you foolish? Can it be undone?
And drown me with their sweetness. O, come hither,
At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner:
the name of good by his government. How far is his
Royal Antiochus--on what cause I know not--
I am at your grace's pleasure.
If I should tell my history, it would seem
Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see:
His banners sable, trimm'd with rich expense,
His child, I wis, to incest bring,
The worth that learned charity aye wears:
Thou couldst have spoke so well, ne'er dream'd thou couldst.
And seen the desolation of your streets:
Exit LYCHORIDA
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold,
To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience,
You have a gentle heart. I saw you lately,
Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves,
Therefore to make his entrance more sweet,
What is your title?
This Antioch, then, Antiochus the Great
The voice of dead Thaisa!
Grows elder now and cares it be not done.
We have no reason to desire it,
to make one there.
To those that cry by night, convey thy deity
nobleman, and she sent him away as cold as a
Their bodies, even to loathing, for they so stunk,
Be one of those that think
To have bless'd mine eyes with her!
Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I
Re-enter, from the barge, Lord, with MARINA, and a young Lady
Even women have cast off, melt thee, but be
Virgins on each side, CERIMON and other Inhabitants
Lychorida, no tears:
I embrace you.
He's both their parent, and he is their grave,
If thine consider'd prove the thousandth part
And by relating tales of others' griefs,
O you most potent gods! what's here? a corse!
Thou art resolved?
Princes, it is too late to talk of love,
Your grace, that fed my country with your corn,
How does my queen? Thou stormest venomously,
'Tis most strange,
Thou art like the harpy,
This is the rarest dream that e'er dull sleep
Whispers a Lord, who goes off in the barge of LYSIMACHUS
have fortunes coming upon you. Mark me: you must
Who, frighted from my country, did wed
A pretty moral,
Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.
But stay, the knights are coming: we will withdraw
What courage, sir? God save you!
Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon
honourable parts, and are the governor of this place.
It nips me unto listening, and thick slumber
Making, to take your imagination,
The labour of each knight in his device.
Your charity, and hundreds call themselves
That on the touching of her lips I may
o'ershower'd,
Re-enter a Servant, with boxes, napkins, and fire
I never did her hurt in all my life:
Thy oath remember, thou hast sworn to do't:
Which wash both heaven and hell, and thou, that hast
By savage Cleon: she shall tell thee all,
see a rose, and she were a rose indeed, if she had but--
The good in conversation,
May to your wishes pleasure bring
As thunder threatens us: this is Marina.
Why, I'll tell you: this is called Pentapolis, and
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the
In your imagination hold
I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty.
hangman shall execute it. Come your ways. We'll
Antiochus and his daughter dead,
All praises, which are paid as debts,
'Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea.
And her to incest did provoke:
Aside
O, that's as much as you would be denied
Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried,
I have bargained for the joint,--
Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay
My temple stands in Ephesus: hie thee thither,
Till Pericles be dead,
The care I had and have of subjects' good
And so in ours: some neighbouring nation,
Through you, increase our wonder and set up
For he's no man on whom perfections wait
The word, 'Lux tua vita mihi.'
What, prithee?
She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellent
I have, Antiochus, and, with a soul
[Kneeling]
Where with it I may appear a gentleman,
'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us.
Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts
DUMB SHOW.
With Leonine, a murderer.
That kings should let their ears hear their
So princes their renowns if not respected.
The motto thus, 'Sic spectanda fides.'
A model which heaven makes like to itself:
'Faith, by no means, she has so strictly tied
she's dead,
I know not, but
That would be son to great Antiochus.
The more my fault
PERICLES discovered
The music of the spheres! List, my Marina.
Deliver'd weeping.
I know you not.
O, here is
fits you, search out of the calendar, and nobody
Did you go to 't so young? Were you a gamester at
And leave us to our free election.
To any syllable that made love to you.
You are like one that superstitiously
Made me to quit the house.
That Cleon's wife, with envy rare,
SCENE III. Tyre. An ante-chamber in the palace.
As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.
I understand you not.
I cannot be much lower than my knees.
poor three, and they can do no more than they can
So, on your patience evermore attending,
Good madam, make me blessed in your care
'Keep it, my Pericles, it hath been a shield
But cried 'Good seaman!' to the sailors, galling
But if to that my nature need a spur,
Exit
Your creatures, who by you have been restored:
Such fear so grew in me, I hither fled,
Wherefore she does, and swears she'll never stint,
For good Marina, that her daughter
Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the
What canst thou wish thine enemy to be?
To foster it, nor ever to preserve.
Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree
Sir?
I here confess myself the king of Tyre,
She is all happy as the fairest of all,
Hark you, my friend, you said you could not beg.
But since my master and mistress have bought you,
With more than foreign heart. We every day
My derivation was from ancestors
What should he say? We wept after her hearse,
The Gentlemen and the two Sailors descend, and go on board the barge
He, obedient to their dooms,
SCENE II. The same. A public way or platform leading to the
The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.
A better prince and benign lord,
Like lies disdain'd in the reporting.
have no more gentlemen driven away. Come your ways, I say.
Where now you're both a father and a son,
To give her princely training, that she may be
Enter, PERICLES and SIMONIDES at one door, with  Attendants, a Messenger meets them, kneels, and  gives PERICLES a letter: PERICLES shows it  SIMONIDES, the Lords kneel to him. Then enter  THAISA with child, with LYCHORIDA a nurse. The  KING shows her the letter, she rejoices: she and  PERICLES takes leave of her father, and depart with  LYCHORIDA and their Attendants. Then exeunt SIMONIDES and the rest
These cates resist me, she but thought upon.
My lord, that, may be, hath endured a grief
The inhospitable Cleon, but I am
Pardon us, sir, with us at sea it hath been still
Since men take women's gifts for impudence.
Enter two Sailors, one belonging to the Tyrian vessel, the other to the barge, to them HELICANUS
Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,
'tis turned to a rusty armour.
Who shall not be more dear to my respect
You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.
For it was sometime target to a king,
If he govern the country, you are bound to him
their will,
Come, say your prayers.
Therefore each one betake him to his rest,
Are stored with corn to make your needy bread,
Hum, ha!
SCENE III. The temple of Diana at Ephesus, THAISA standing
And never more have joy.
For to seek my mother!
Boult, take her away, use her at thy pleasure:
Hight Philoten: and it is said
As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft
What trade, sir?
Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper at the
jangling of the bells, that he should never have
Kneels to THAISA
Quiet and gentle thy conditions! for
Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like the
Exeunt
You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre,
Why, are all your beggars whipped, then?
For the crown'd Truth to dwell in: I will
I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common
For by his rusty outside he appears
If the sea's stomach be o'ercharged with gold,
And here, I hope, is none that envies it.
Prithee, tell me one thing first.
Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!
Sharp physic is the last: but, O you powers
O, here he is.
Hast moved us: what seest thou in our looks?
Conveniently the rest convey,
And with the ostent of war will look so huge,
At sea! what mother?
To stop the air would hurt them. The blind mole casts
No din but snores the house about,
Of your dead queen.
Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit,
Come, give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it.
the moon, I care not.
She was the daughter of a king:
In your supposing once more put your sight
Which never could I so convey,
To sing a song that old was sung,
For which the people's prayers still fall upon you,
crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.
Enter PERICLES, on shipboard
The Second Knight passes over
Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a
The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence,
Which read and not expounded, 'tis decreed,
To say my mother's name was Thaisa?
Which my dead father did bequeath to me.
I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces.
Call'd Marina
That none but I and my companion maid
Who now reprovest me for it,--
Philemon, ho!
No, nor of any shores:
shall 'scape whipping.
Exeunt
[Aside]  Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.
Consume your blood with sorrowing: you have
Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, will
Gentlemen.
We do not look for reverence, but to love,
Like Patience gazing on kings' graves, and smiling
Helicanus, thou
Or my life imply her any danger?
O, go to. Well, well,
Here to have death in peace is all he'll crave.
Come, come, I know 'tis good for you.
And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us,
Exit a Servant
The word, 'Quod me alit, me extinguit.'
Taking advantage of our misery,
Till the rough seas, that spare not any man,
If e'er this coffin drive a-land,
Who, looking for adventures in the world,
But curb it, spite of seeing. O, my lord,
Noble sir,
And in your search spend your adventurous worth,
It fits thee not to ask the reason why,
As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make,
Might equal yours, if both were justly weigh'd.
Reverend sir,
Yours, sir,
The motto thus, in Spanish, 'Piu por dulzura que por fuerza.'
The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.
Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father
Losing a mite, a mountain gain.
Would draw heaven down, and all the gods, to hearken:
But to have divinity preached there! did you ever
Divinest patroness, and midwife gentle
By turning o'er authorities, I have,
For I was born at sea.
Shall for itself itself perform.
Come your ways, follow me.
Voice and favour!
My utmost skill in his recovery, Provided
Exit BOULT
I' the justice of compare! O villain Leonine!
Thou god of this great vast, rebuke these surges,
'The fairest, sweet'st, and best lies here,
A priestly farewell to her: suddenly, woman.
And other chosen attractions, would allure,
Good morrow to your lordship.
For riches strew'd herself even in the streets,
Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men that
Are like the Trojan horse was stuff'd within
With sighs shot through, and biggest tears
Upon the pillow: hie thee, whiles I say
This is the man that can, in aught you would,
This Tarsus, o'er which I have the government,
'Faith, I must ravish her, or she'll disfurnish us
My thanks, sweet madam.
Thou hadst been toss'd from wrong to injury,
As you will live, resolve it you.
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught
The fifth, an hand environed with clouds,
Behold him.
My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike
Led on by heaven, and crown'd with joy at last:
And wishes fall out as they're will'd.
To the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS
That, if heaven slumber while their creatures want,
A present murderer does prepare
Which now are midway stopp'd:
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist,
Seem'd not to strike, but smooth: but thou
At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa.
Into an honest house, our story says.
I did but crave.
It pleaseth you, my royal father, to express
A nurse of me. Lord, how your favour's changed
Upon this coast, I warrant you.
Enter PERICLES
been that day in the belfry.
Or here I'll cease.
Most honour'd Cleon, I must needs be gone,
The stages of our story. Pericles
[Aside]  Well, I perceive
Enter two or three Lords
How dare the plants look up to heaven, from whence
Although assail'd with fortune fierce and keen,
O abominable!
Be suffer'd to come near him.
them. If there be not a conscience to be used in
You scorn: believe me, 'twere best I did give o'er.
have her first.' Such a maidenhead were no cheap
Celestial Dian, goddess argentine,
Why, your herb-woman, she that sets seeds and roots
Soft! here he comes: I must dissemble it.
But since he's gone, the king's seas must please:
And stay your coming to present themselves.
Thus ready for the way of life or death,
And to fulfil his prince' desire,
I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs,
But bent all offices to honour her.
How!
I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.
Get fire and meat for these poor men:
Thought nought too curious, are ready now
To-morrow all for speeding do their best.
Into life's flower again!
Is made with all due diligence
We'll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves
come within my doors! Marry, hang you! She's born
But crave! Then I'll turn craver too, and so I
Where, by her own most clear remembrance, she
You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.
A city on whom plenty held full hand,
I never practised it.
Enter SIMONIDES, reading a letter, at one door: the Knights meet him
Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease.
Of an inestimable value, and his daughter with him,
A twelvemonth longer, let me entreat you to
I'll then discourse our woes, felt several years,
[To MARINA]  Come your ways. My masters, you say
How's this? how's this? Some more, be sage.
Call it by what you will, the day is yours,
A delicate odour.
Who is the first that doth prefer himself?
Yes, if it please your majesty.
too wenchless.
My father, and a king.
difference of all complexions. What! do you stop your ears?
lists. A pavilion by the side of it for the
That excellent complexion, which did steal
will be strong with us for giving over.
Sir, I will use
had ne'er come here.
To me and to my aid the blest infusions
From whence we had our being and our birth.
Exeunt
Or die in the adventure, be my helps,
And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but even
With their superfluous riots, hear these tears!
Before the palace of Antioch
Ay, so well, that you must be her master,
Some other is more fit.
The fairest in all Syria,
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead,
Dionyza does appear,
Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both:
court distant from this shore?
Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself,
Re-enter HELICANUS, LYSIMACHUS, and MARINA
And open this to Pericles. I do shame
Deep clerks she dumbs, and with her needle composes
Had princes sit, like stars, about his throne,
Here is a thing too young for such a place,
creature of sale.
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it,
To take thy life from thee.
To bar heaven's shaft, but sin had his reward.
Did seek to murder me: and having woo'd
this change of thoughts,
From ashes ancient Gower is come,
Will take the crown. The sum of this,
I found that kindness in a father:
Whirring me from my friends.
'Twould be too tedious to repeat,
No needful thing omitted.
I believe you,
Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,
birth-day, and there are princes and knights come
Must feel war's blow, who spares not innocence:
Diana, aid my purpose!
To whom this wreath of victory I give,
Post on the lame feet of my rhyme,
Took it in rage, though calm'd have given't again:
Enter PERICLES, at one door, with all his train,  CLEON and DIONYZA, at the other. CLEON shows  PERICLES the tomb, whereat PERICLES makes  lamentation, puts on sackcloth, and in a mighty passion departs. Then exeunt CLEON and DIONYZA
The sun and moon ne'er look'd upon!
Which tells me in that glory once he was,
Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves.
Note it not you, Thaisa?
'Tis now your honour, daughter, to explain
Whom thou hast poison'd too:
Copp'd hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is throng'd
Not minding whether I dislike or no!
Built up, this city, for his chiefest seat:
How, how, Lychorida!
Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your
Heavens forgive it!
If good King Pericles be.
Is almost finish'd, and her epitaphs
The Knights dance
She moves
Which can as well inflame as it can kill.
Seize with thine eagle's talons.
inclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?
Wilt thou spit all thyself? The seaman's whistle
And he, good prince, having all lost,
Of your fair courtesy.
Poison and treason are the hands of sin,
How they may be, and yet in two,
How chance my daughter is not with you? Do not
What he will do graciously, I will thankfully receive.
I thank you, sir.
Must have inventions to delight the taste,
her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her
I can go home alone.
We were never so much out of creatures. We have but
And that's the mark I know you level at:
One sin, I know, another doth provoke,
manner of your garments well.
That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates,
Even as my life, or blood that fosters it.
Who wither'd in her spring of year.
Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim them louder,
Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear,
Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king
'Tis wondrous heavy. Wrench it open straight:
You wish me well.
Brought her to Mytilene, 'gainst whose shore
The men of Tyrus on the head
Why, as men do a-land, the great ones eat up the
Return them, we are ready, and our daughter,
And these our ships, you happily may think
And the gods make her prosperous!
That have inflamed desire in my breast
I will desist,
When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge
That him and his they in his palace burn,
Great shouts within and all cry 'The mean knight!'
Thy ear is liable, thy food is such
Exeunt all but CERIMON
That dwell in vegetives, in metals, stones,
Virtue and cunning were endowments greater
Day serves not light more faithful than I'll be.
Cannot hold out to Tyrus: there I'll leave it
A fire from heaven came and shrivell'd up
Did vail their crowns to his supremacy:
As with foul incest to abuse your soul,
The good gods preserve you!
This is your wife.
Motion! Well, speak on. Where were you born?
Exeunt
Enter, from the brothel, two Gentlemen
Who, finger'd to make man his lawful music,
Exit
I charge your charity withal, leaving her
Without your vows. Till she be married, madam,
Sir, lend me your arm.
So indeed I did.
That monster envy, oft the wrack
One daughter, and a wench full grown,
Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the gods
To glad your ear, and please your eyes.
And yet but justice, for though
Hush, my gentle neighbours!
Did come to see you.
The gods for murder seemed so content
ACT I
That whoso ask'd her for his wife,
My father's dead.
By wicked Dionyza.
Those palates who, not yet two summers younger,
To show his sorrow, he'ld correct himself,
calling. But here comes Boult.
SCENE IV:
Attended on by many a lord and knight.
What is the fourth?
Can stead the quest. At last from Tyre,
Mark'd he your music?
Marshal the rest, as they deserve their grace.
Will take away your life.
I think
Antioch, farewell! for wisdom sees, those men
No.
And wanting breath to speak help me with tears.
See how belief may suffer by foul show!
I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping.
That is the cause we trouble you so early,
Who either by public war or private treason
From good descending?
For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shall
opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.
Why will you kill me?
Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her
He's father, son, and husband mild,
May the two latter darken and expend,
Exeunt
Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I
Thunder above and deeps below
So,
O dear Diana,
At sea in childbed died she, but brought forth
If further yet you will be satisfied,
Though I show ill in't. So I take my leave.
To do my work with haste.
Exeunt Pandar and Pirates
For wicked Cleon and his wife, when fame
That even cracks for woe! This chanced tonight.
foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have
Did the sea cast it up?
the bee of her honey.
O, take her home, mistress, take her home: these
To think of what a noble strain you are,
plucked yet, I can assure you.
pavilion on deck, with a curtain before it, PERICLES
Melt and no more be seen. O, come, be buried
How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?
To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.
And so afflict our province. Yet once more
If you require a little space for prayer,
Knights,
Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter, and thou art
Canst thou catch any fishes, then?
At Ephesus, the temple see,
In reverend Cerimon there well appears
At your command. Know you the character?
As you do love, fill to your mistress' lips,--
How Thaliard came full bent with sin
To which that blast gives heat and stronger glowing,
qualities can make her be refused.
Of all say'd yet, I wish thee happiness!
Though doubts did ever sleep.
But amongst honest women.
Am like to do: take in your arms this piece
SCENE I:
porpus how he bounced and tumbled? they say
Were it to woo my daughter, for it seems
Did mock sad fools withal: this cannot be:
Who pour their bounty on her, and her gain
Since every worth in show commends itself.
Exeunt Bawd, Pandar, and BOULT
Is by your fancy's thankful doom.
The master calls, and trebles their confusion.
A man who for this three months hath not spoken
Sir, 'tis the governor of Mytilene,
Do it, and happy, by my silver bow!
Exeunt Lords
Where shall be shown you all was found with her,
What mean you, sir?
Use honour with you.
I, King Pericles, have lost
O, make for Tarsus!
Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather, my mistress.
Enter SIMONIDES, THAISA, Lords, and Attendants
And the gods strengthen thee!
To knit in her their best perfections.
Your master will be dead ere you return,
we'll have flesh for holidays, fish for
This queen, worth all our mundane cost.
Enter HELICANUS and ESCANES
Your griefs! for what? wrong not your prince you love.
Sir,
Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,
Marina was she call'd, and at her birth,
Seeks to take off by treason's knife.
By Lady Fortune, while our scene must play
SCENE II:
'Tis the king's subtlety to have my life.
Although they gave their creatures in abundance,
SCENE V. Mytilene. A street before the brothel.
Priapus, and undo a whole generation. We must
Makes me look dismal will I clip to form,
In Pericles, his queen and daughter, seen,
My heart
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.
Pardon old Gower,--this longs the text.
And that to hear an old man sing
Are you a woman?
I made to it, to know of whence you are.
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow'd
And being join'd, I'll thus your hopes destroy,
Exeunt
Wherein my death might yield her any profit,
Good morrow.
Shall marry her at Pentapolis. And now,
We'll mingle our bloods together in the earth,
That you aptly will suppose
And do upon mine altar sacrifice.
I hold it ever,
If it be true that I interpret false,
Therefore let's have fresh ones, whate'er we pay for
Enter THALIARD
Not my desert.
My lord, she's not paced yet: you must take some
Where as thou know'st, against the face of death,
And he that otherwise accounts of me,
What was thy mother's name? tell me but that,
estate, 'twere not amiss to keep our door hatched.
Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life.
bastards,--as, I think, I have brought up some eleven--
I accuse them not.
I am Pericles of Tyre: but tell me now
Exeunt
I shall not be hang'd now, although I would,
Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre,
proclamation, but he made a groan at it, and swore
Throw their best eyes upon't!
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,
This Philoten contends in skill
Nothing to think on but ensuing death:
I sought a husband, in which labour
Enter CERIMON, with a Servant, and some Persons who have been shipwrecked
From stem to stern: the boatswain whistles, and
Yon knight doth sit too melancholy,
What means the nun? she dies! help, gentlemen!
But faithfulness and courage.
He should have struck, not spoke, or that these pirates,
Of general wonder. But, alack,
And for a further grief,--God give you joy!--
And should he doubt it, as no doubt he doth,
And time that is so briefly spent
Were more than you expect, or more than's fit,
She sings like one immortal, and she dances
Have you a working pulse? and are no fairy?
OLD receptacles, or common shores, of filth,
South-west.
I'll pay your bounties, till then rest your debtor.
As toss'd it upon shore.
From bourn to bourn, region to region.
A vestal livery will I take me to,
I'ld give it to undo the deed. O lady,
Gentlemen, there's some of worth would come aboard,
O, I am mock'd,
withal, and defy the surgeon?
And waste the time, which looks for other revels.
But bootless is your sight: he will not speak To any.
Rare as you seem to be.
'Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it.
And to him in his barge with fervor hies.
Here in Diana's temple.
Who freely give to every one that comes
Have studied physic, through which secret art,
By hurting it, or when to the lute
No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you,
Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view
The regent made in Mytilene
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
Sir, your queen must overboard: the sea works high,
Look to your little mistress, on whose grace
The tomb where grief should sleep, can breed me quiet?
Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must, for your
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Re-enter LEONINE
This mercy shows we'll joy in such a son:
The ground's the lowest, and we are half way there.
little ones: I can compare our rich misers to
A man whom both the waters and the wind,
That I was shipp'd at sea, I well remember,
As I am son and servant to your will,
Be it so, then:
In framing an artist, art hath thus decreed,
Assuming man's infirmities,
He asks of you, that never used to beg.
It is in vain, he will not speak to you.
Now, the gods to-bless your honour!
Moreover, if you please, a niece of mine
And from their watery empire recollect
More a little, and then dumb.
To eat those little darlings whom they loved.
To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope,
I trod upon a worm against my will,
I beseech your honour, give me leave: a word, and
I said, and said no more but what my thoughts
Remember what I have said.
Have scarce strength left to give them burial.
Calls my lord?
Hark, hark, you gods!
Your presence glads our days: honour we love,
And they have seized Marina. Let her go:
Enter two or three Servants with a chest
That for our gold we may provision have,
To make some good, but others to exceed,
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,
Well, I do commend her choice,
And how achieved you these endowments, which
sun.
And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature,
To herald thee from the womb: even at the first
Sir,
I go, my lord.
Where am I? Where's my lord? What world is this?
Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a
And princes not doin g so are like to gnats,
Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am?
buy him a wooden one?
Exit
[Aside]  How from the finny subject of the sea
Disgorges such a tempest forth,
The crown of Tyre, but he will none:
And what was first but fear what might be done,
Than yours, my lord.
Until this day, to scour it in the dust.
Of hell would not in reputation change:
Presumes to reach, all thy whole heap must die.
Exit
I desire to find him so, that I may worthily note him.
To please the fool and death.
For vice repeated is like the wandering wind.
'Here I give to understand,
A more content in course of true delight
Why, I cannot name't but I shall offend.
With bloody veins, expecting overthrow,
Walk with Leonine, the air is quick there,
And I will undertake all these to teach.
Worse and worse, mistress, she has here spoken holy
The very principals did seem to rend,
Well, I will see what I can do for thee: if I can
A letter, that she loves the knight of Tyre!
Marry, hang her up for ever!
kill King Pericles, and if I do it not, I am sure to
Is this wind westerly that blows?
Brought hither to Pentapolis,
And thou by some incensed god sent hither
Or dead, give's cause to mourn his funeral,
Here is the regent, sir, of Mytilene
The viol once more: how thou stirr'st, thou block!
Thanks, fortune, yet, that, after all my crosses,
Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.
Is she not a fair creature?
DUMB SHOW.
Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,
Most rare.
Of Helicanus would set on
Come, the gods have done their part in you.
Exeunt Knights
Let me entreat to know at large the cause
Inflame too nicely, nor let pity, which
That pupils lacks she none of noble race,
And thrown into the sea. But I'll see further:
Marina thus the brothel 'scapes, and chances
Lord governor, for so we hear you are,
Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak.
Which welcome we'll accept, feast here awhile,
Of all say'd yet, mayst thou prove prosperous!
It hath been sung at festivals,
Good sooth, it show'd well in you: do so now:
If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart
To you as much, sir! I am beholding to you
Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue, and
O, let those cities that of plenty's cup
entertainment.
Come, other sorts offend as well as we.
I have drawn her picture with my voice.
SCENE III. The same. A hall of state: a banquet prepared.
Even in the height and pride of all his glory,
With this strict charge, even as he left his life,
Unless your thoughts went on my way.
By waves from coast to coast is tost:
Think death no hazard in this enterprise.
Since I have here my father's gift in's will.
By bright Diana, whom we honour, all
Above five hours: see how she gins to blow
For other service first: toward Ephesus
Enter Pandar, Bawd, and BOULT
What minstrelsy, and pretty din,
A prince of Macedon, my royal father,
Unscissor'd shall this hair of mine remain,
My lord, that ne'er before invited eyes,
either get her ravished, or be rid of her. When she
I will believe you by the syllable
But can you teach all this you speak of?
gives a good report to a number to be chaste.
'T has been a turbulent and stormy night.
Till when,--the which I hope shall ne'er be seen,--
That he have his. Call up some gentlemen.
SCENE IV. Tarsus. A room in the Governor's house.
Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.
will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.
Who makes the fairest show means most deceit.
I warrant you, madam.
Then were it certain you were not so bad
My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands
O my distressed lord, even such our griefs are,
hair, complexion, height, age, with warrant of her
Did the sea toss upon our shore this chest:
Till now, I ne'er endured.
Shake off the golden slumber of repose.
SCENE II. Tyre. A room in the palace.
Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, we
And by those fearful objects to prepare
he was a wise fellow, and had good discretion, that,
O, not all, my friend, not all, for if all your
To killen bad, keep good alive,
Reads from a scroll
beside the Tyrian vessel.
At whose expense 'tis done.
LEONINE runs away
country Greece gets more with begging than we can do
All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury.
Madam, my thanks and prayers.
Old Helicanus goes along behind.
Thou that beget'st him that did thee beget,
For a more blustrous birth had never babe:
Do you but strike the blow.
How she came placed here in the temple,
All love the womb that their first being bred,
By Jove, I wonder, that is king of thoughts,
O, sir, things must be as they may, and what a man
Resolve your angry father, if my tongue
An if she were a thornier piece of ground than she
May be, nor can I think the contrary,
For death-like dragons here affright thee hard:
All that may men approve or men detect!
hast the harvest out of thine own report.
SCENE I. Antioch. A room in the palace.
Apollo, perfect me in the characters!
Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me
Re-enter BOULT with MARINA
Prithee, speak:
We thank your grace.
Wishing him my meat. Sure, he's a gallant gentleman.
But in our orbs we'll live so round and safe,
But sea-room, an the brine and cloudy billow kiss
Good morrow to the good Simonides.
This body, like to them, to what I must,
To hear the rest untold: sir, lead's the way.
He 'scaped the land, to perish at the sea.
Nature's own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry,
And, with her fellow maids is now upon
A wither'd branch, that's only green at top,
Your honour and your goodness teach me to't,
You shall prevail,
I nill relate, action may
Did you ever hear the like?
By Juno, that is queen of marriage,
Help, master, help! here's a fish hangs in the net,
When noble Pericles shall demand his child?
He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy,
And then with what haste you can get you to bed.
'Tis like a coffin, sir.
All fortune to the good Simonides!
Patience, good sir,
'Tis well, mistress, your choice agrees with mine,
Of your king's sorrow.
he might know none of his secrets: now do I see he
'Tis done.
Thy burden at the sea, and call'd Marina
As dangerous as the rest. Your time's expired:
We'll sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown to
You are, you are--O royal Pericles!
From the dejected state wherein he is,
with warrant.
And drown'd.
To honour them:
Thither, gentle mariner.
Sits here, like beauty's child, whom nature gat
Now, mild may be thy life!
How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind virgin?
Well, well, as for him, he brought his disease
Not carry her aboard. If she remain,
We have stretch'd thus far, let us beseech you
I knew him tyrannous, and tyrants' fears
Who died the minute I was born,
You may,
Then honour be but a goal to my will,
Alas, sir!
pains to work her to your manage. Come, we will
You may depend hereafter. Come, my lord.
Now, the pox upon her green-sickness for me!
Exit with Third Fisherman
Never did thought of mine levy offence,
If in which time expired, he not return,
Enter PERICLES, with his train, LYSIMACHUS, HELICANUS, MARINA, and a Lady
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself,
They may awake their helps to comfort them.
Bad child, worse father! to entice his own
What pageantry, what feats, what shows,
This day I'll rise, or else add ill to ill.
To any one, nor taken sustenance
hearkened to their father's testament. There was a
Tell thee, with speechless tongues and semblance pale,
Sir, there's a barge put off from Mytilene,
Than nobleness and riches: careless heirs
Enter SIMONIDES, THAISA, Lords, Attendants, and Knights, from tilting
A prize! a prize!
Though by the tenor of our strict edict,
Disappears
With absolute Marina: so
Nor boots it me to say I honour him.
Soft! it smells most sweetly in my sense.
Yet neither pleasure's art can joy my spirits,
He puts on sackcloth, and to sea. He bears
Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife:
Being at Antioch--
But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would have
I left behind an ancient substitute:
if he should cheapen a kiss of her.
you use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.
She would with rich and constant pen
His queen with child makes her desire--
Exit
Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?
Advanced in time to great and high estate,
Of whence he is, his name and parentage.
Well said, well said, the fire and cloths.
Give me a gash, put me to present pain,
Next, he's the governor of this country, and a man
Thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon,
That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince,
The island's side.
[To the Sailor of Mytilene]  Where is lord Helicanus?
Never was waves nor wind more violent,
Vie feathers white. Marina gets
And make a conquest of unhappy me,
A knight of Sparta, my renowned father,
[Aside]  Now, by the gods, I do applaud his courage.
Here, here's gold for thee.
So, this is Tyre, and this the court. Here must I
SCENE III. Tarsus. A room in CLEON's house.
resorters stand upon sound legs. How now!
Thou sayest true: 'tis not our bringing up of poor
Even in his throat--unless it be the king--
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage,
You not your child well loving, yet I find
And for your faithfulness we will advance you.
make thee a pair, and I'll bring thee to the court myself.
Till that his rage and anger be forgot,
If this be true, which makes me pale to read it?
Forgot thee utterly: nor have I time
Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.
How now! How a dozen of virginities?
The Third Knight passes over
Till cruel Cleon, with his wicked wife,
He sought to murder: but her better stars
He loves you well that holds his life of you.
Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,
The Sixth Knight, PERICLES, passes over
Be quiet then as men should be,
Then, as you are as virtuous as fair,
observed: and we are strong in custom. Therefore
Has broken a staff or so, so let it pass.
Yet let me obtain my wish.
Wrench it open,
Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs:
Your exposition misinterpreting,
On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed.
Must cast thee, scarcely coffin'd, in the ooze,
know'st this,
Your lady seeks my life, come you between,
How courtesy would seem to cover sin,
And crickets sing at the oven's mouth,
He may my proffer take for an offence,
My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again,
The purchase is to make men glorious,
To know for what he comes, and whence he comes,
shall I search the market?
And snatch them straight away? We here below
Enter PERICLES, wet
And for his sake I wish the having of it,
What's her price, Boult?
Now, as I can remember, by my troth,
Who is my principal?
Kings are earth's gods, in vice their law's
Now, blessing on thee! rise, thou art my child.
An angry brow, dread lord.
Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile.
None!
Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune,
Like goodly buildings left without a roof
No, I will rob Tellus of her weed,
My name is Marina.
A canvas-climber. 'Ha!' says one, 'wilt out?'
Know that our griefs are risen to the top,
To keep her still, and men in awe,
But there is something glows upon my cheek,
Exit
My lord,
Was nursed with Cleon, who at fourteen years
You think me an impostor: no, good faith,
Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady?
Peaceful and comfortable!
Thaisa was my mother, who did end
Extremity out of act. What were thy friends?
Unto thy value I will mount myself
By you being pardon'd, we commit no crime
Exeunt
I'll present myself. Peace to the lords of Tyre!
Waste it for you, like taper-light.
My actions are as noble as my thoughts,
shall's go hear the vestals sing?
Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow!
Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life.
That thought you worthy of it.
Threw him ashore, to give him glad:
parish up again. But if the good King Simonides
But, not to be a troubler of your peace,
A gentleman of Tyre,
Was't so?
had some reason for't, for if a king bid a man be a
Since he's so great can make his will his act,
How now, Marina! why do you keep alone?
My fortunes--parentage--good parentage--
I have ground the axe myself,
If he be none of mine, my sanctity
Enter GOWER
Soon fall to ruin,--your noble self,
And the device he bears upon his shield
Beseech you, first go with me to my house,
For them to play upon, entreats you pity him:
I like that well: nay, how absolute she's in't,
proportion to live quietly, and so give over.
[To MARINA]  Pray you, come hither awhile. You
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,
Blush not in actions blacker than the night,
Blows dust in other's eyes, to spread itself,
To place upon the volume of your deeds,
With fingers long, small, white as milk,
They are now starved for want of exercise:
Whither will you have me? Why do you weep?
Of every virtue gives renown to men!
I am sworn,
But you, my knight and guest,
Till he hath pass'd necessity.
And give them repetition to the life.
Falseness cannot come from thee, for thou look'st
Antiochus from incest lived not free:
Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.
So up and down the poor ship drives:
Yield many scholars.
But since my landing I have understood
We have a maid in Mytilene, I durst wager,
Nor yet the other's distance comfort me.
Ay, to eleven, and brought them down again. But
The cambric, which she made more sound
I'll well remember you.
Nature this dowry gave, to glad her presence,
To the court of King Simonides
Aside
And had intent to murder him,
I do commend to your content:
With such delightful pleasing harmony.
Enter GOWER
Scorning advice, read the conclusion then:
Come, my Marina.
Yet I was mortally brought forth, and am
He hath found the meaning, for which we mean
Et bonum quo antiquius, eo melius.
If this but answer to my just belief,
The third of Antioch,
For she was yielded there.
And that you'ld guide me to your sovereign's court,
bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go
have I heard on o' the land, who never leave gaping
It shall no longer grieve without reproof.
Enter PERICLES with Attendants
My dearest wife was like this maid, and such a one
Where when men been, there's seldom ease,
way!
She is alive, behold,
I wait the sharpest blow, Antiochus.
E'er the blither for their drouth.
You are of our chamber, and our mind partakes
To equal any single crown o' the earth
of my power, and so stand aloof for more serious
With all my heart, and, when you come ashore,
Who seem'd my good protector, and, being here,
Sir, my daughter thinks very well of you,
But have been gazed on like a comet: she speaks,
you? where a man may serve seven years for the loss
The cat, with eyne of burning coal,
Be manly, and take comfort.
This sword shall prove he's honour's enemy.
Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.
Recall not what we give, and therein may
There, when my maiden priests are met together,
Envy the great nor do the low despise.
DIANA appears to PERICLES as in a vision
Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.
That almost burst the deck.
The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear:
O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor
What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with us?
How possibly preserved, and who to thank,
money presently. Wife, take her in, instruct her
Enough.
Exit
he can resolve you.
O your sweet queen!
Made many princes thither frame,
When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good
Ho, Helicanus!
shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded like
So, lift there.
Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men,
I threw her overboard with these very arms.
And therefore instantly this prince must die:
All leave us else, but let your cares o'erlook
But weary for the staleness.
there's no going but by their consent: therefore I
Before the people all,
Good Helicane, that stay'd at home,
That flies i' the purer air!
Lay with you in your coffer: which are now
If it please the gods to defend you by men, then men
No, no. Come, I am for no more bawdy-houses:
'Tis of some wreck.
With full bags of spices! A passport too!
And, clasping to the mast, endured a sea
Exeunt
[To MARINA]  First, I would have you note, this is
And cursed be he that will not second it.
A babe is moulded. Be attent,
Sir,
I'll bring the body presently.
None that beheld him, but, like lesser lights,
I pray ye, greet them fairly.
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know,
I will do't, but yet she is a goodly creature.
Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven!
Is but a substance that must yield to you,
He's more secure to keep it shut than shown:
A second time within these arms.
Nay, come, your hands and lips must seal it too:
Who was by good appliance recovered.
Fear not, my lord, but think
Now our sands are almost run,
Sit down: thou art no flatterer:
Enter, from thence, LYSIMACHUS and Lords, with the Gentlemen and the two Sailors
Till fortune, tired with doing bad,
this garment through the rough seams of the waters:
Not to eat honey like a drone
As well as we! ay, and better too, we offend worse.
For flattery is the bellows blows up sin,
sojourner we have, you'll lose nothing by custom.
There's nothing can be minister'd to nature
Exeunt
And cased as richly, in pace another Juno,
Ay, but hark you, my friend, 'twas we that made up
of shame and iniquity. O, you have heard something
May we not get access to her, my lord?
he would see her to-morrow.
Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.
In honour of whose birth these triumphs are,
Most wise in general: tell me, if thou canst,
steeple, bells, and all.
To grace thy marriage-day, I'll beautify.
Where, by the loss of maidenhead,
For that's an article within our law,
And to the world and awkward casualties
My frail mortality to know itself,
Is not this true?
I will end here.
As heaven had lent her all his grace,
For the embracements even of Jove himself,
Which pleasure fits an husband, not a father,
I'll take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath:
How came you in these parts? where were you bred?
He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.
All poverty was scorn'd, and pride so great,
Would ever with Marina be:
The which when any shall not gratify,
To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree,
As Dian bade: whereto being bound,
Their tables were stored full, to glad the sight,
The very doors and windows savour vilely.
The diamonds of a most praised water
Patience, good sir, do not assist the storm.
As if the entertainment in our court
Therefore the earth, fearing to be o'erflow'd,
We with our travels will endeavour us.
She is thy very princess. Who is this?
Now to Marina bend your mind,
Is not to reason of the deed, but do it.
Which make a sound, but kill'd are wonder'd at.
And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal mine,
Enter a Messenger
My heart can lend no succor to my head.
O, sir, I can be modest.
My lord, I hear.
As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed.
Exit
Thou know'st I have power
That can recover him.
Pray, walk softly, do not heat your blood:
Here, say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him.
A portly sail of ships make hitherward.
O Helicanus, strike me, honour'd sir,
The gods can have no mortal officer
Exit
This stage the ship, upon whose deck
Breathes out of her: she hath not been entranced
Like him you are: did you not name a tempest,
Enter a Lord
Here where his daughter dwells, and on this coast
What, are you both pleased?
Thy speech had alter'd it. Hold, here's gold for thee:
Reverend appearer, no,
Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still,
On mother's flesh which did me breed.
The beauty of this sinful dame
Is't not a goodly presence?
her very description.
I will obey thee. Helicanus!
To Pericles thy father.
should lodge them with this sign.
[Aside]  How! the king gone!
wooing. But I protest to thee, pretty one, my
Than to be thirsty after tottering honour,
First, sir, I pray,
The purple violets, and marigolds,
But cast their gazes on Marina's face,
Then, lest my lie be cropp'd to keep you clear,
She questionless with her sweet harmony
This borrow'd passion stands for true old woe,
Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels,
So well as soft and tender flattery.
left, till he cast bells, steeple, church, and
To me, my father?
And never interrupt you.
Hail, sir! my lord, lend ear.
Thaliard,
Though they did change me to the meanest bird
Being thereto not compell'd.
Makes my past miseries sports: you shall do well,
Reads the inscription on MARINA's monument
As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise:
Exit
Rise, prithee, rise.
She tells me here, she'd wed the stranger knight,
To an honour'd triumph strangely furnished.
Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel.
O, sir, a courtesy
And further he desires to know of you,
When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.
On Neptune's billow, half the flood
To call thyself Marina.
For now the wind begins to blow,
Wears yet thy silver livery. She at Tarsus
Had spread their cursed deed, and honour'd name
Or can conceal his hunger till he famish?
Where we left him, on the sea. We there him lost,
And I, as fits my nature, do obey you:
On ember-eves and holy-ales,
For which, the most high gods not minding longer
He well may be a stranger, for he comes
Of what you shall deliver. Yet, give me leave:
SCENE V. Pentapolis. A room in the palace.
Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire,
The thing which is flatter'd, but a spark,
Brief, he must hence depart to Tyre:
I am unworthy for her schoolmaster.
Make up the rest upon you!
Who can be other in this royal presence?
That neither in our hearts nor outward eyes
of a leg, and have not money enough in the end to
Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did,
Which makes her both the heart and place
Scorn now their hand should give them burial.
The rest--hark in thine ear--as black as incest:
with working.
turn, therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou
How I might stop this tempest ere it came,
Have read it for restoratives:
If both were open'd.
For truth can never be confirm'd enough,
Upon a stranger?
the lewdly-inclined. I'll bring home some to-night.
She was of Tyrus the king's daughter,
Here comes that which grows to the stalk, never
For going on death's net, whom none resist.
come, put it on, keep thee warm. Now, afore me, a
To satisfy my lady.
When I was born:
No, Escanes, know this of me,
Who by thy wisdom makest a prince thy servant,
The pregnant instrument of wrath
Fie, fie upon her! she's able to freeze the god
Which to prevent he made a law,
Exit
Since they do better thee in their command.
By your furtherance I am clothed in steel,
Thou hold'st a place, for which the pained'st fiend
What say you, master?
Brought me to Mytilene. But, good sir,
If thou hadst drunk to him, 't had been a kindness
To any living creature: believe me, la,
To have his head.
Turn our blown sails, eftsoons I'll tell thee why.
Thy nimble, sulphurous flashes! O, how, Lychorida,
An armour, friends! I pray you, let me see it.
And gives them what he will, not what they crave.
she's a virgin?
Then it is thus: the passions of the mind,
[Aside]  A pretty moral.
And whispers in mine ear, 'Go not till he speak.'
Expect even here, where is a kingly patient:
be one! Hush! here come the lords of Tyre.
'Tis most certain.
And to her father turn our thoughts again,
He's but a country gentleman,
That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.
'For that it saved me, keep it, in like necessity--
The gods revenge it upon me and mine,
Had not a show might countervail his worth.
I doubt not but this populous city will
The more she gives them speech. Where do you live?
Or know what ground's made happy by his breath.
The which is good in nothing but in sight!
Or when she would with sharp needle wound
Because we bid it. Say, is it done?
I am resolved.
Search the market narrowly, Mytilene is full of
Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,
My riches to the earth from whence they came,
The Knights and Ladies dance
SCENE III. Tarsus. A room in CLEON's house.
I'll leave you, my sweet lady, for a while:
Bound me in servitude.
Enter PERICLES, CLEON, DIONYZA, and LYCHORIDA with MARINA in her arms
O heavens bless my girl! But, hark, what music?
Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus,
Why do you stir so early?
Who has a book of all that monarchs do,
What this maid is, or what is like to be,
Why would she have me kill'd?
Who stood equivalent with mighty kings:
She died at night, I'll say so. Who can cross it?
Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.
Her countless glory, which desert must gain,
The infant of your care, beseeching you
Which who shall cross?--along to go:
Most likely, sir.
Enter CLEON and DIONYZA
In bringing up my child.
A burning torch that's turned upside down,
conscience. The poor Transylvanian is dead, that
Any of these ways are yet better than this,
My Dionyza, shall we rest us here,
Of education all the grace,
And then return to us.
She makes our profession as it were to stink afore
Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,
The lady that I sent for. Welcome, fair one!
Faints
By break of day, if the wind cease.
What! I must have a care of you.
If in his grave he rest, we'll find him there,
And yet the fire of life kindle again
Some such thing
It is not good to cross him, give him way.
Good sooth, I care not for you.
I'll tame you, I'll bring you in subjection.
This queen will live: nature awakes, a warmth
Enter GOWER, before the monument of MARINA at Tarsus
Her to her chamber, that 'tis impossible.
What being more known grows worse, to smother it.
And for an honest attribute cry out
Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have
Sir?
And so to sea. Their vessel shakes
Doth your lordship call?
I'll do my best, sir.
This, this: no more, you gods! your present kindness
When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace,
This king were great, his greatness was no guard
Of this poor infant, this fresh-new sea-farer,
Whom if you find, and win unto return,
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually,
Enter three FISHERMEN
Exit
He thanks your grace, names himself Pericles,
When what is done is like an hypocrite,
Bring me the satin coffer: lay the babe
Diseases have been sold dearer than physic,
'Tis more by fortune, lady, than by merit.
Is it no more to be your daughter than
indeed, but how honourable he is in that, I know not.
With such a graceful courtesy deliver'd?
O, 'tis too true.
Still confirmation:
Like motes and shadows see them move awhile,
And will dispatch.
Here many sink, yet those which see them fall
Is left to govern. Bear you it in mind,
of all our cavaliers, and make our swearers priests.
And AEsculapius guide us!
While summer-days do last. Ay me! poor maid,
Of a pair of bases.
'She died by foul play.'
For look how fresh she looks! They were too rough
And be resolved he lives to govern us,
Her reason to herself is only known,
Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods
Ho, gentlemen! my lord calls.
For she was born at sea, I have named so, here
Enter MARINA, with a basket of flowers
As silver-voiced, her eyes as jewel-like
We have given order to be next our own.
He, doing so, put forth to seas,
Earlier too, sir, if now I be one.
That never aim'd so high to love your daughter,
Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the king,
We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre,
An honest woman, or not a woman.
Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid! I have a gown here,
She would sit still and weep.
Her face the book of praises, where is read
Enter Pirates
Embrace him, dear Thaisa, this is he.
That will prove awful both in deed and word.
Either be ruled by me, or I will make you--
By the gods, I have not:
Sit, sir, sit.
Who is the second that presents himself?
What would you have me do? go to the wars, would
What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong wind
These fishers tell the infirmities of men,
Further to question me of your king's departure:
It hath done to me the worst. Yet, for the love
Forbear the absence of your king:
Do any thing but this thou doest. Empty
Your honour knows what 'tis to say well enough.
What now ensues, to the judgment of your eye
The name of help grew odious to repeat.
He would depart, I'll give some light unto you.
To lop that doubt, he'll fill this land with arms,
That the strict fates had pleased you had brought her hither,
Thus time we waste, and longest leagues make short,
We might proceed to cancel of your days,
Was given me by one that had some power,
You said you would believe me,
To compass such a boundless happiness!
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,
Coistrel that comes inquiring for his Tib,
From him I come
Re-enter Bawd
My daughter's buried. Well: where were you bred?
We drink this health to you.
Not well.
I will embrace
Under the covering of a careful night,
And cursed Dionyza hath
Sit, sir, I will recount it to you:
As hath been belch'd on by infected lungs.
My education been in arts and arms,
How many worthy princes' bloods were shed,
Drawn by report, adventurous by desire,
No other than I appear.
Traitor!
virginity, and cry 'He that will give most shall
'Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss.
Whither wilt thou have me?
briefly yield her, for she must overboard straight.
To scape his hands where I was like to die.
It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it,
Who tells us life's but breath, to trust it error.
near the altar, as high priestess, a number of
Born in a tempest, when my mother died,
You may so, 'tis the better for you that your
Is an arm'd knight that's conquer'd by a lady,
And what this fourteen years no razor touch'd,
I'll show the virtue I have borne in arms.
ACT IV
He flatters you, makes war upon your life.
As great in blood as I myself.--
Enter THALIARD
Whence, driven before the winds, he is arrived
O you gods!
What, are you merry, knights?
And, spite of all the rapture of the sea,
Manner'd as she is born.
I am glad to see your honour in good health.
Thinks all is writ he speken can,
Even ripe for marriage-rite, this maid
villain, he's bound by the indenture of his oath to
Let not our ships and number of our men
Give this to the 'pothecary,
Whose death indeed's the strongest in our censure:
Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life:
Yet pause awhile:
From others' labours, for though he strive
gallants. We lost too much money this mart by being
Now sleep y-slaked hath the rout,
Of their white flags display'd, they bring us peace,
you, he hath a fair daughter, and to-morrow is her
Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.
Besides this treasure for a fee,
[Aside]          What from Antioch?
Young prince of Tyre, you have at large received
And yet the end of all is bought thus dear,
Be my so used a guest as not an hour,
This was a goodly person,
We are honour'd much by good Simonides.
But the main grief springs from the loss
Re-enter ANTIOCHUS
Here have you seen a mighty king
And what he craves.
Where you may abide till your date expire.
We are near Tarsus.
last devours them all at a mouthful: such whales
No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, she
We hate the prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him:
I'll make my will then, and, as sick men do
I'll not bereave you of your servant.
knees, that she would make a puritan of the devil,
Half-part, mates, half-part.
What need we fear?
I do not doubt thy faith,
till they've swallowed the whole parish, church,
way to the pox. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus
five or at seven?
Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back--
Has done no more than other knights have done,
We have descried, upon our neighbouring shore,
And what's
What, are you both agreed?
From whence an issue I might propagate,
Embolden'd with the glory of her praise,
Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves,
Exit DIONYZA
Her eyelids, cases to those heavenly jewels
To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth,
Prove that I cannot, take me home again,
when we are old?
She gives the cursed bawd. Here we her place,
SCENE II. Ephesus. A room in CERIMON's house.
'Gainst whom I am too little to contend,
Do you know this house to be a place of such resort,
A soldier to thy purpose.
And not to be a rebel to her state,
I'll do any thing now that is virtuous, but I
should do for clients her fitment, and do me the
Made louder by the o'er-fed breast
And she is fair too, is she not?
Hold, here's more gold for thee.
Come, let us leave her,
When all, for mine, if I may call offence,
Who only by misfortune of the seas
Her private actions to your secrecy,
But I wept for it. How have I offended,
Contend not, sir, for we are gentlemen
This ornament
Exeunt
And danger, which I fear'd, is at Antioch,
That give heaven countless eyes to view men's acts,
Till the disaster that, one mortal night,
One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery,
There will I visit Cleon, for the babe
For me, be you thoughten
Unto a stranger knight to be so bold:
Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast!
Upon a courser, whose delightful steps
For me,
I have one myself,
Hangs upon mine eyes: let me rest.
Where our scenes seem to live. I do beseech you
And lords and ladies in their lives
How this dead queen re-lives?
'Faith, some do, and some do not. But, mistress, if
But to prorogue his grief.
Did warrant me was likely.
In feather'd briefness sails are fill'd,
A birth, and death?
With hostile forces he'll o'erspread the land,
Exit
Rich tire about you, should at these early hours
who, for aught I know,
To such proceeding
We have here one, sir, if she would--but there never
And all-to topple: pure surprise and fear
Which if we should deny, the most just gods
Enter CLEON, the governor of Tarsus, with DIONYZA, and others
My message must return from whence it came.
Performance shall follow.
Wherein we are not destitute for want,
That he is promised to be wived
Aside
Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,
Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea,
Shook as the earth did quake,
Here is a lady that wants breathing too:
Did ere solicit, or my hand subscribe
nothing so fitly as to a whale, a' plays and
Says to 'em, if King Pericles
I'ld wish no better choice, and think me rarely wed.
Exeunt
Like one I loved indeed. What were thy friends?
Is still at Tarsus, where each man
My recompense is thanks, that's all,
You are princes and my guests.
I'll make him sure enough: so, farewell to your highness.
No light, no fire: the unfriendly elements
Then you love us, we you, and we'll clasp hands:
Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while,
And make pretence of wrong that I have done him:
Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun them,
For men to see, and seeing wonder at.
A villain to attempt it, who having drawn to do't,
Enter HELICANUS, with other Lords
These knights unto their several lodgings!
And yet he rides it out. Now please you wit.
Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, caulked
And so with me: the great Antiochus,
Look how thou stirrest now! come away, or I'll
E'er since I can remember.
the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship be
To wisdom he's a fool that will not yield,
Enter GOWER
And in it is Lysimachus the governor,
Omit we all their dole and woe:
And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him,
My casket and my jewels, and bid Nicander
All perishen of man, of pelf,
Death may usurp on nature many hours,
Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure, for here's nothing
Is now again thwarting the wayward seas,
Be like a beacon fired to amaze your eyes.
And we'll pray for you.
Exit
Exeunt
Murder's as near to lust as flame to smoke:
Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are?
Sir, even now
Are arms to princes, and bring joys to subjects.
Your honour has through Ephesus pour'd forth
We thus submit unto,--our sovereign.
From a well-experienced archer hits the mark
Her stature to an inch, as wand-like straight,
How now! what's the matter?
Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory?
Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring'st in haste,
How sure you are my daughter. But, what music?
But I will gloze with him.--Young prince of Tyre,
So with his steerage shall your thoughts grow on,--
doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough.
They are well dispatch'd, now to my daughter's letter:
Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess
For your sweet music this last night: I do
'Our heir-apparent is a king!
Yon king's to me like to my father's picture,
We cannot but obey
And of how coward a spirit.
I will not have excuse, with saying this
A villain.
SCENE VI. The same. A room in the brothel.
If that thy prosperous and artificial feat
authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly
His kingly hands, haling ropes,
That have their first conception by mis-dread,
Exeunt Pirates with MARINA
[To Lords without]  Let none disturb us.--Why should
Your will to mine,--and you, sir, hear you,
were cast away before us even now.
Through whom the gods have shown their power, that can
Drove him to this.
leave his honour and her together. Go thy ways.
Were not this glorious casket stored with ill:
Now crouches fore the mouse's hole,
For who digs hills because they do aspire
And which, without desert, because thine eye
Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late
Would own a name too dear. O, that the gods
Makes both my body pine and soul to languish,
come out. Ha! bots on't, 'tis come at last, and
good clothes: there's no further necessity of
Nay, I'll be patient.
In Philoten all graceful marks,
Bestow your love and your affections
Which, to betray, dost, with thine angel's face,
O, you say well.
Either expound now, or receive your sentence.
Lying with simple shells. O Lychorida,
Deliver'd, by the holy gods,
If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.
Traitor, thou liest.
Here stands a lord, and there a lady weeping,
And wherefore call'd Marina?
Found there rich jewels, recover'd her, and placed her
My lord, I hear none.
Great king,
Whom our fast-growing scene must find
The outward habit by the inward man.
Modest as Justice, and thou seem'st a palace
Those mothers who, to nousle up their babes,
And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant,
So, leave him all. Well, my companion friends,
Can any way speak in his just commend,
I thank thee for it, and heaven forbid
Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.
the face of the gods.
My daughter might have been: my queen's square brows,
For her relapse is mortal. Come, come,
For certain in our story, she
Thou show'dst a subject's shine, I a true prince.
He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjects
His eye doth level at, so thou ne'er return
Well, I had rather than twice the worth of her she
Doth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies:
Your rule direct to any, if to me.
As thou
Ay, she quickly pooped him, she made him roast-meat
That threw her in the sea. Make a fire within:
A man throng'd up with cold: my veins are chill,
This jewel holds his building on my arm:
We'll bring your grace e'en to the edge o' the shore,
Ay, sir, and he deserves so to be called for his
By you relieved, would force me to my duty:
You gods that made me man, and sway in love,
If wars, we are unable to resist.
By the four opposing coigns
And doubting lest that he had err'd or sinn'd,
What shipping and what lading's in our haven,
SCENE I. On board PERICLES' ship, off Mytilene. A close
I have another suit.
as I command you.
As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end
This king unto him took a fere,
Boult!
Or never more to view nor day nor light.
A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears,
I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles,
When I was born, the wind was north.
She thinks not so, peruse this writing else.
Loud music is too harsh for ladies' heads,
Enter CERIMON and THAISA
That nature works, and of her cures, which doth give me
Or council has respect with him but he.
Should therein make me vile, the common body,
Ne aught escapen but himself,
What is it
Down on thy knees, thank the holy gods as loud
dream of such a thing?
To have practised more the whipstock than the lance.
Blow, and split thyself.
Virtue preserved from fell destruction's blast,
To punish them, although not done, but meant.
Thy deafening, dreadful thunders, gently quench
Re-enter BOULT
The which hath fire in darkness, none in light:
I'll have done presently.
Our king and all his company.
By your untimely claspings with your child,
As jewels lose their glory if neglected,
I am glad on't with all my heart.--
[Aside]  Simonides!
What do you think of my daughter, sir?
The king my father, sir, has drunk to you.
And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse,
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers
Prest for this blow. The unborn event
Sir, you are music's master.
But see what heaven can do! By this our change,
being once gone.
If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a
'Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them.
It may be,
Have placed me in this sty, where, since I came,
Which Pericles hath lost,
That I came with no ill intent, for to me
Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays!
I thank thee. Mariner, say what coast is this?
The minute I began.
O, attend, my daughter:
Courage enough: I do not fear the flaw,
Well, I will go,
He seems to be a stranger, but his present is
Twixt me and death,'--and pointed to this brace,--
Which the world together joins,
Longer for him to make his rest.
To give thee hallow'd to thy grave, but straight
What's dumb in show I'll plain with speech.
Ay, and the targets, to put off the shame:
Walk half an hour, Leonine, at the least:
To PERICLES
That all those eyes adored them ere their fall
a spaniel. Come your ways.
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin
What, ho, Pilch!
Then give you up to the mask'd Neptune and
the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir up
Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided
And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
That rounds the mortal temples of a king
Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind,
Intended or committed was this fault?
Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,
I do repent me, read not my name there
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.
These differences shall all rest under gage
Comfort, my liege, why looks your grace so pale?
Or I'll be buried in the king's highway,
I thank my liege, that in regard of me
Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think,
The language I have learn'd these forty years,
Where is the duke my father with his power?
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
Enter NORTHUMBERLAND
Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part,
And those his golden beams to you here lent
Such as it is, being tender, raw and young:
Thy words are but as thoughts, therefore, be bold.
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
Exeunt
The time hath been,
My gracious lord,--
And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
And bow my knee before his majesty:
As now our flesh is banish'd from this land:
To scarlet indignation and bedew
of our two cousins coming into London.
Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords:
lately came from the king, commands the contrary.
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
They may break his foaming courser's back,
Little are we beholding to your love,
Is dangerous treason: he is come to open
By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st,
It is my son, young Harry Percy,
Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench,
O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!
By thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
This deadly blot in thy digressing son.
I have been studying how I may compare
Return with welcome home from banishment.
The news is very fair and good, my lord:
To dim his glory and to stain the track
With that dear blood which it hath fostered,
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:
Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
I find myself a traitor with the rest,
My native English, now I must forego:
We were not born to sue, but to command,
And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st
For taking so the head, your whole head's length.
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
My soul the father, and these two beget
This let alone will all the rest confound.
Despair not, madam.
You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.
To execution and the hand of death.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby
Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth:
Exeunt
Upon his bad life to make all this good,
Where'er I wander, boast of this I can,
His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
Upon remainder of a dear account,
The next news is, I have to London sent
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
Each day still better other's happiness,
My gracious uncle--
To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
A generation of still-breeding thoughts,
There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
A woman, and thy aunt, great king, 'tis I.
Princes and noble lords,
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
When weeping made you break the story off,
I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.
Think what you will, we seize into our hands
Saddle my horse.
To answer twenty thousand such as you.
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king
Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
You urged me as a judge, but I had rather
Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,
More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
This we prescribe, though no physician,
Which live like venom where no venom else
That in a Christian climate souls refined
Be merry, for our time of stay is short
Good aunt, stand up.
March sadly after, grace my mournings here,
The king had cut off my head with my brother's.
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,
That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat,
Welcome, my lord	what is the news?
Exeunt
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
How happy then were my ensuing death!
Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land
I see old Gaunt alive, O, then, my father,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
Where lies he?
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
That I have worn so many winters out,
To Italy, and there at Venice gave
Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields
Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb,
But presently prevent the ways to wail.
Your care is gain of care, by new care won:
Go, count thy way with sighs, I mine with groans.
High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York
Whither?
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
A traitor to my God, my king, and me:
Against thy entrance.
Exeunt
That ever was survey'd by English eye,
For Mowbray and myself are like two men
O loyal father of a treacherous son!
He shortens four years of my son's exile:
Alas, I look'd when some of you should say,
Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes
Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?
For Christian service and true chivalry,
Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?
Be his own carver and cut out his way,
Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me,
Flourish. Exeunt KING RICHARD II and train
It stands your grace upon to do him right.
He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.
Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed
Enter LORD BERKELEY
First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me
Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,
O how that name befits my composition!
And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
Did will what he did spend and spent not that
I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head:
What says his majesty?
Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain,
God save the king! although I be not he,
I have a thousand spirits in one breast,
We make woe wanton with this fond delay:
Within the limits of yon lime and stone:
Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.
Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome,
The clogging burthen of a guilty soul.
And shall the figure of God's majesty,
And what said the gallant?
But what it is, that is not yet known, what
And show fair duty to his majesty.
Therefore, we banish you our territories:
And toil'd with works of war, retired himself
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
That every stride he makes upon my land
Enforce attention like deep harmony:
Enter EARL OF SALISBURY
And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?
For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.
On what condition stands it and wherein?
How long shall I be patient? ah, how long
I thank thee, gentle Percy, and be sure
Obedience bids I should not bid again.
My legs can keep no measure in delight,
To wayward sickliness and age in him:
Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,
Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.
A brace of draymen bid God speed him well
The cares I give I have, though given away,
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
Enter JOHN OF GAUNT sick, with the DUKE OF YORK, and c
Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.
The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments,
His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,
Whilst you have fed upon my signories,
Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.
What, think you then the king shall be deposed?
I count myself in nothing else so happy
We are amazed, and thus long have we stood
Will but remember me what a deal of world
That strew the green lap of the new come spring?
In the base court? Come down? Down, court!
With words of sooth! O that I were as great
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle:
Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.
Though this be all, do not so quickly go,
Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.
Which else would post until it had return'd
My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,
Receive thy lance, and God defend the right!
Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,
Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
Call it not patience, Gaunt, it is despair:
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
Thou fond mad woman,
And mark my greeting well, for what I speak
All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagne
And by the royalties of both your bloods,
Did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me?
But in this kind to come, in braving arms,
Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.
On equal terms to give him chastisement?
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:
Northumberland, say thus the king returns:
QUEEN and Ladies retire
Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon,
Enter DUKE OF YORK attended
Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
Stay and be secret, and myself will go.
Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
His noble kinsman: most degenerate king!
O, no! the apprehension of the good
Shall I obtain it?
Give me my boots, I say, saddle my horse.
And never see day that the happy sees,
Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom,
In some large measure to thy father's death,
Exeunt
'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into
Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
To melt myself away in water-drops!
Draw near,
The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more
That we may arm us to encounter it.
Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.
Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE and THOMAS MOWBRAY
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.
To keep the oath that we administer:
And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,
Of his bright passage to the occident.
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.
And in compassion weep the fire out,
I would my skill were subject to thy curse.
Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,
The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.
And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change,
That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
His tongue is now a stringless instrument,
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.
And these and all are all amiss employ'd.
Exit JOHN OF GAUNT
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand
Over the glittering helmet of my foe!
And duty bids defend, the other again
Come I appellant to this princely presence.
Nor shall not be the last, like silly beggars
Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits,
To look so poorly and to speak so fair?
Were I but now the lord of such hot youth
Both who he is and why he cometh hither
Awhile to work, and after holiday.
For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours
Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd
Bespake them thus: 'I thank you, countrymen:'
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath
Of sorrow or of joy?
And for we think the eagle-winged pride
May hourly trample on their sovereign's head,
And urged it twice together, did he not?
Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.
This prison where I live unto the world:
Me cause to wail but teachest me the way
Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?
That brings me food to make misfortune live?
Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
Have I deserved at your highness' hands.
Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
Re-enter DUKE OF YORK, with KING RICHARD II, and Officers bearing the regalia
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:
A king of beasts, indeed, if aught but beasts,
Wherein thou liest in reputation sick,
Since we can not atone you, we shall see
Why have you not proclaim'd Northumberland
As full of valour as of royal blood:
Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.
Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields
The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
As dissolute as desperate, yet through both
To his most royal person, hither come
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
I pardon him.
Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
The commons will not then be satisfied.
And yet salt water blinds them not so much
We will descend and fold him in our arms.
As were our England in reversion his,
Good uncle, let this end where it begun,
I heard you say, 'Is not my arm of length,
Then am I king'd again: and by and by
'Tis thought the king is dead, we will not stay.
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
That tell black tidings.
Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue
Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
And you that do abet him in this kind
Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,
Landlord of England art thou now, not king:
The resignation of thy state and crown
And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me,
Rise up, good aunt.
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.
Enter HENRY PERCY
This fortress built by Nature for herself
O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,
Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me,
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
You will be there, I know.
He shall be none,
O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state:
As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!
For there, they say, he daily doth frequent,
That mercy which true prayer ought to have.
Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry:
In God's name and the king's, say who thou art
Once more, adieu, the rest let sorrow say.
But if I could, by Him that gave me life,
So it be new, there's no respect how vile--
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
God for his mercy! what a tide of woes
Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse,
And both return back to their chairs again:
SCENE IV. A camp in Wales.
Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood:
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.
Yet ask.
I do beseech your majesty, impute his words
And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.
Then, England's ground, farewell, sweet soil, adieu,
Is near the hate of those love not the king.
That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,
'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.
Which false hope lingers in extremity.
Against a change, woe is forerun with woe.
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen
It doth remember me the more of sorrow,
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage
But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
I never in my life did look on him.
And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.'
Enter KING RICHARD II, with BAGOT and GREEN at one door, and the DUKE OF AUMERLE at another
And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,
'Tis well that thou hast cause
With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
My lords of England, let me tell you this:
And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
So, now I have mine own again, be gone,
And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
How long a time lies in one little word!
Kneels
In weeping after this untimely bier.
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd:
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
For violent fires soon burn out themselves,
Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him:
For night-owls shriek where mounting larks
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.
He is as like thee as a man may be,
Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
Call him a slanderous coward and a villain:
I would appeach him.
Armies of pestilence, and they shall strike
Go, signify as much, while here we march
The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,
His answer was, he would unto the stews,
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd
The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
We pray with heart and soul and all beside:
Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
Should dying men flatter with those that live?
The king is come: deal mildly with his youth,
On some known ground of treachery in him?
Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
Exit Servant
As near as I could sift him on that argument,
Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke's,
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
Madam, we'll play at bowls.
You shall.
Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up
O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye
When I do see the very book indeed
Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword,
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,
What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell,
Thither will I with you, for little office
For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
Surrey, thou liest.
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains,
Till you did make him misinterpret me,
The manner of their taking may appear
That laid the sentence of dread banishment
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know,
To breathe this news, yet what I say is true.
Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
As we this garden! We at time of year
'Tis very true, my grief lies all within,
Exit, borne off by his Attendants
Your will be done: this must my comfort be,
Against thy majesty, boys, with women's voices,
The precious jewel of thy home return.
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes,
Unless you please to enter in the castle
A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,
What more remains?
But little vantage shall I reap thereby,
And living too, for now his son is duke.
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
High-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire,
The slavish motive of recanting fear,
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,
With some few private friends upon this coast.
The trumpets sound. Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE, appellant, in armour, with a Herald
Enter a Servant
And darts his light through every guilty hole,
Enter the QUEEN and two Ladies
Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would
Or else he never would compare between.
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
Which with usurping steps do trample thee:
Aumerle that was,
As a long-parted mother with her child
And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:
No, my good Lord, he hath forsook the court,
Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.
On pain of death, no person be so bold
Of either, madam.
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
Which in myself I boldly will defend,
At Ravenspurgh.
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
Before the expiration of thy time,
Now is this golden crown like a deep well
It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench
Norfolk, throw down, we bid, there is no boot.
Before I make reply to aught you say.
Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd
And though you think that all, as you have done,
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes,
Sorrow and grief of heart
Exeunt
Besides himself, are all the English peers,
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:
I am the last of noble Edward's sons,
Farewell, my lord: securely I espy
For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
For we will make for Ireland presently.
A lunatic lean-witted fool,
Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs
Mine honour is my life, both grow in one:
O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
How can you say to me, I am a king?
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
Of holy reverence, who, I cannot learn.
Madam, we'll dance.
But now I know thy mind, thou dost suspect
I have a king here to my flatterer.
Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he,
Procure your sureties for your days of answer.
Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Enter DUKE OF YORK
And if you crown him, let me prophesy:
Shall be your love and labour's recompense.
Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke,
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls,
Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath,
Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused:
Down, down I come, like glistering Phaethon,
Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot,
Amen.
Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries,
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The honourable father to my foe
'Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Your differences shall all rest under gage
Post you to London, and you will find it so,
Here to make good the boisterous late appeal,
Give me my boots, I say.
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.
Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not
With her companion grief must end her life.
Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy,
With nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves,
Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way:
Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
With mine own breath release all duty's rites:
We are inforced to farm our royal realm,
Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,
Deep malice makes too deep incision,
That will the king severely prosecute
Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!
My gracious lord, I tender you my service,
To stand upon my kingdom once again.
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd
Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.
Like an unseasonable stormy day,
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd,
Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
Rage must be withstood:
No good at all that I can do for him,
Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest,
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,
Too far in years to be a pupil now:
So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,
Give me mine own again, 'twere no good part
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir
And minister correction to thy fault!
O, then how quickly should this arm of mine.
Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
From some forefather grief, mine is not so,
Than an unstringed viol or a harp,
Many years of happy days befal
The plate, corn, revenues and moveables,
Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd
The blood of English shall manure the ground,
Hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully,
Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go:
Lord marshal, command our officers at arms
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:
With all the gracious utterance thou hast
And fight and die is death destroying death,
Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood
Of neither, girl:
And all goes worse than I have power to tell.
To be o'erpower'd, and wilt thou, pupil-like,
All places that the eye of heaven visits
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?
It is too little, helping him to all,
Where did I leave?
Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
So be thy fortune in this royal fight!
Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.
I never long'd to hear a word till now,
And barbarism itself have pitied him.
Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his,
Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away,
And cloister thee in some religious house:
His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,
And therefore, personally I lay my claim
The lining of his coffers shall make coats
My liege, one word.
That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.
We see the very wreck that we must suffer,
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,
I live with bread like you, feel want,
SCENE IV. LANGLEY. The DUKE OF YORK's garden.
Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
Neglected my sworn duty in that case.
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest
'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.
Six frozen winter spent,
Madam, your majesty is too much sad:
Not able to endure the sight of day,
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne
Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,
Part us, Northumberland, I toward the north,
For 'twere no charity, yet, to wash your blood
My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:
Ho! who is within there?
Discharge my followers: let them hence away,
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
In that I live and for that will I die.
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
Or that I could forget what I have been,
What is six winters? they are quickly gone.
That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.
And patient underbearing of his fortune,
I play the torturer, by small and small
And bids me speak of nothing but despair.
Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain,
Stand all apart,
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.
Enter EXTON, with persons bearing a coffin
Now God in heaven forbid!
Then thus I turn me from my country's light,
Even in the lusty havior of his son.
We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.
Yes, my good lord,
To think our former state a happy dream,
Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me
Now, afore God--God forbid I say true!--
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?
And that's the wavering commons: for their love
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?
And I must find that title in your tongue,
Unlikely wonders, how these vain weak nails
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
I give this heavy weight from off my head
It issues from the rancour of a villain,
To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,
Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate:
For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear:
This dead king to the living king I'll bear
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
That from this castle's tatter'd battlements
To make the base earth proud with kissing it:
The noisome weeds, which without profit suck
And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
And all your southern gentlemen in arms
Strive to speak big and clap their female joints
Say that again.
Enter KING RICHARD II and Guard
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:
Since presently your souls must part your bodies--
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:
There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
Flourish. Exeunt KING RICHARD II, QUEEN, DUKE OF AUMERLE, BUSHY, GREEN, and BAGOT
With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat,
Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!'
A wandering vagabond, my rights and royalties
But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
Hold, take my ring.
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?
By flatterers, and what they will inform,
Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
But that is lost for being Richard's friend,
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
To meet at London London's king in woe.
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles
We did observe. Cousin Aumerle,
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it
No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck
Thus thrust disorderly into my hands,
Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee,
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
Although apparent guilt be seen in them,
For their advantage and your highness' loss.
Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,
For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,
Mistake me not, my lord, 'tis not my meaning
Thou hast said enough.
Enter JOHN OF GAUNT with DUCHESS
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.
That bucket down and full of tears am I,
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself
Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:
Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!
We will for Ireland, and 'tis time, I trow:
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?
Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not,
Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:
When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,
Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
To HENRY BOLINGBROKE
And when I mount, alive may I not light,
Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,
Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls!
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
Enfranchisement immediate on his kn ees:
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!
His treasons will sit blushing in his face,
I cannot do it, yet I'll hammer it out.
I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
As if the world were all dissolved to tears,
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,
His face still combating with tears and smiles,
Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
Carlisle, this is your doom:
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,
Whose state and honour I for aye allow.
For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated:
That hath dismissed us from our stewardship,
Why, uncle, what's the matter?
down, king!
They'll talk of state, for every one doth so
Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:
Tendering the precious safety of my prince,
On some apparent danger seen in him
Condemns you to the death. See them deliver'd over
Greater he shall not be, if he serve God,
Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay:
That I might strive to kill it with a groan.
Not yet, I thee beseech:
Against infection and the hand of war,
Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!
Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king:
These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
Be rush'd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin
Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,
The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,
A plot shall show us all a merry day.
Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue
My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry
Tut, tut!
As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry,
An hour before I came, the duchess died.
But only they have privilege to live.
Barkloughly castle call they this at hand?
And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir:
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment
I take it up, and by that sword I swear
And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.
On this side my hand, and on that side yours.
Why, York, what wilt thou do?
Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.
The appellant in all duty greets your highness,
Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.
God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay
Ere further leisure yield them further means
Enter NORTHUMBERLAND and others
Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.
That it may show me what a face I have,
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers,
Here did she fall a tear, here in this place
And let them die that age and sullens have,
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls
What art thou? and how comest thou hither,
Transform'd and weaken'd? hath Bolingbroke deposed
Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize
Is spotless reputation: that away,
Exeunt
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
My loving lord, I take my leave of you,
A deed of slander with thy fatal hand
And, till so much blood thither come again,
If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.
I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,
But makes one pardon strong.
Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.
And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,
Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire:
As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?'
Enter KING RICHARD II and QUEEN, DUKE OF AUMERLE,  BUSHY, GREEN, BAGOT, LORD ROSS, and LORD WILLOUGHBY
Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle,
Enter DUCHESS OF YORK
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
As to be cast forth in the common air,
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,
What subject can give sentence on his king?
The hateful commons will perform for us,
Than a delightful measure or a dance,
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
Why, it contains no king?
With clog of conscience and sour melancholy
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
O my liege,
Exeunt from above
With heads, and not with hands, those whom you curse
Can wash the balm off from an anointed king,
Did scowl on gentle Richard, no man cried 'God save him!'
The other part reserved I by consent,
And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford,
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.
Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand,
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,
The noble duke hath been too much abused.
Take leave and part, for you must part forthwith.
Say, is my kingdom lost? why, 'twas my care
With too much urging your pernicious lives,
With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,
Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,
How high a pitch his resolution soars!
Love they to live that love and honour have.
And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong,
To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
Our part therein we banish with yourselves--
Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,
With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends,'
That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand,
I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.
Of such as have before endured the like.
Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,
Without suspicion.
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries,
Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops
This earth shall have a feeling and these stones
That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
Good mother, be content, it is no more
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,
How far brought you high Hereford on his way?
From my own windows torn my household coat,
And know not now what name to call myself!
It is a matter of small consequence,
Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe,
He does me double wrong
And, though mine enemy, restored again
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss,
Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
Of that sweet way I was in to despair!
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill,
Suddenly taken, and hath sent post haste
But neither my good word nor princely favour:
To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks,
Our uncle York lord governor of England,
For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,
Exeunt
Or seven fair branches springing from one root:
The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes,
Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm,
An offer, uncle, that we will accept:
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
Be swift like lightning in the execution,
More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before:
Your highness to assign our trial day.
Pardon me, if you please, if n ot, I, pleased
Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.
Madam, we'll tell tales.
let me in.
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.
But by bad courses may be understood
Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven:
How God and good men hate so foul a liar.
Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,
To bear the tidings of calamity.
Shall point on me and gild my banishment.
Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!
Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
Nay, nothing, all is said
And, for our coffers, with too great a court
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
The other to enjoy by rage and war:
I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
[Within]  Open the door, secure, foolhardy king:
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
That England, that was wont to conquer others,
Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come
Or worthily, as a good subject should,
Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!
I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king,
To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,
The dateless limit of thy dear exile,
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
Marry. God forbid!
Would God that any in this noble presence
How near the tidings of our comfort is.
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
The name of king? o' God's name, let it go:
To the possession of thy royal hand:
The pride of kingly sway from out my heart,
My lord, will't please you to fall to?
By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
It doth contain a king, King Richard lies
And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me,
The household of the king.
Who hither come engaged by my oath--
And thus expiring do foretell of him:
And consequently, like a traitor coward,
But here is Carlisle living, to abide
May be a precedent and witness good
Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
SCENE I. Bristol. Before the castle.
Flourish. Exeunt
O, who can hold a fire in his hand
Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound
Hath held his current and defiled himself!
The other down, unseen and full of water:
And in my loyal bosom lies his power.
Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke,
Ay, no, no, ay, for I must nothing be,
This music mads me, let it sound no more,
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is
Excepting one, I would he were the best
Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd
Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
Which on thy royal party granted once,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow,
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,
O, full of careful business are his looks!
One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
With rival-hating envy, set on you
Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge
That no man enter till my tale be done.
And then betwixt me and my married wife.
And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith,
And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Open the door, or I will break it open.
Or chivalrous design of knightly trial:
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
As in a theatre, the eyes of men,
Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.
Lo, this is all:--nay, yet depart not so,
Enter DUKE OF YORK, attended
For sleeping England long time have I watch'd,
Re-enter Attendant, with a glass
Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.
Therefore commend me, let him not come there,
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy,
And some few vanities that make him light,
With all my heart
This swears he, as he is a prince, is just,
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!
Against the word:
Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,
Teach thy necessity to reason thus,
Love loving not itself none other can.
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height
To pay their awful duty to our presence?
From out the fiery portal of the east,
Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high,
Exeunt all except the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, the Abbot of Westminster, and DUKE OF AUMERLE
To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.'
In braving arms against thy sovereign.
Grows strong and great in substance and in power.
Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try,
The unstooping firmness of my upright soul:
Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son,
These were his very words.
And yet my letters-patents give me leave:
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
Dies
That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,
Speak it in French, king, say, 'pardonne moi.'
Under whose colours he had fought so long.
Enter DUKE OF AUMERLE
There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest:
But when he frown'd, it was against the French
My figured goblets for a dish of wood,
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls--
And all the household servants fled with him
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
Are making hither with all due expedience
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:
In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,
Exton, I thank thee not, for thou hast wrought
Upon this overweening traitor's foot,
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
That knows no touch to tune the harmony:
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot
Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay
Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
Farewell, my blood, which if to-day thou shed,
An if I do not, may my hands rot off
In an ungracious mouth is but profane.
The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth
Till we assign you to your days of trial.
What power the Duke of York had levied there,
Think not the king did banish thee,
O, but they say the tongues of dying men
Therefore, no dancing, girl, some other sport.
And thou art flying to a fresher clime:
Some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd,
Now mark me, how I will undo myself,
Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,
Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd:
I do not sue to stand,
That owes two buckets, filling one another,
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears:
Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard,
So high above his limits swells the rage
Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands,
The king is not himself, but basely led
Take honour from me, and my life is done:
Or wallow naked in December snow
Courageously and with a free desire
I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect
Am I, who ready here do stand in arms,
Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
To this submission. Yet I well remember
I did confess it, and exactly begg'd
Well, he is gone, and with him go these thoughts.
O, had it been a stranger, not my child,
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,
I had forgot myself, am I not king?
Again uncurse their souls, their peace is made
Say 'pardon,' king, let pity teach thee how:
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage,
With fury from his native residence.
What, are they dead?
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
Is my strict fast, I mean, my children's looks,
Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow:
That reacheth from the restful English court
I would attach you all and make you stoop
Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction:
From the most gracious regent of this land,
Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?
More than with parting from my lord the king.
Exeunt
And there repose you for this night.
But for thy world enjoying but this land,
ACT II
And my large kingdom for a little grave,
Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
I cannot do it, yet I know no cause
Showing an outward pity, yet you Pilates
Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand,
My subjects for a pair of carved saints
And fright our native peace with self-born arms.
Against the state and profit of this land,
Enter KING RICHARD II, JOHN OF GAUNT, with other Nobles and Attendants
That bids me be of comfort any more.
The king shall be contented: must he lose
And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
With slow but stately pace kept on his course,
What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,
As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
Than was that young and princely gentleman.
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
So many blows upon this face of mine,
SCENE V. Pomfret castle.
Or like a cunning instrument cased up,
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle,
Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:
Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.
The purest treasure mortal times afford
You would have bid me argue like a father.
Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king:
To God, my king and my succeeding issue,
As well appeareth by the cause you come,
Hail, royal prince!
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,
God knows I had as lief be none as one.
Name it, fair cousin.
Defiance to the traitor, and so die?
With all the rest of that consorted crew,
The bloody office of his timeless end.
Drawing
How went he under him?
Should so with civil and uncivil arms
While we return these dukes what we decree.
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?
Even in condition of the worst degree,
Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck
The state and inclination of the day:
In the remembrance of a weeping queen.
The favours of these men: were they not mine?
Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:
Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,
Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
Both to defend my loyalty and truth
That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,
This way the king will come, this is the way
To be a make-peace shall become my age:
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour
Enter the Lord Marshal and the DUKE OF AUMERLE
My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who
Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine,
But I bethink me what a weary way
The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
Unless you call it good to pity him,
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
Enter KING RICHARD
And send them after to supply our wants,
Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship,
Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.
It were a shame to let this land by lease,
Proportionable to the enemy
That set'st the word itself against the word!
As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what:
In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!
I will be satisfied, let me see the writing.
That lift your vassal hands against my head
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.
And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
This ague fit of fear is over-blown,
I do defy him, and I spit at him,
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:
The chopping French we do not understand.
Enter QUEEN and Ladies
Join with the present sickness that I have,
And lands restored again be freely granted:
Both to defend himself and to approve
'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?'
O, if you raise this house against this house,
To fight with Glendower and his complices:
And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God,
And here have I the daintiness of ear
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Henry Bolingbroke
'It is as hard to come as for a camel
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:
As doth the blushing discontented sun
What say you now? what comfort have we now?
It will the woefullest division prove
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
My waters, on the earth, and not on him.
They might have lived to bear and he to taste
And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
A loyal, just and upright gentleman:
I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.
Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.
Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,
Exit an attendant
Enter, with drum and colours, HENRY BOLINGBROKE, DUKE OF YORK, NORTHUMBERLAND, Attendants, and forces
Were then but subjects, being now a subject,
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
And never will I rise up from the ground
And yet, incaged in so small a verge,
I fear me, never.
And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit!
I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.
I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
SCENE IV. The court.
In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn,
When triumph is become an alehouse guest?
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
Presuming on an ague's privilege,
Let's march without the noise of threatening drum,
For that my sovereign liege was in my debt
But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march
Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest,
Of capital treason we arrest you here.
To undeck the pompous body of a king,
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know
Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame.
Good uncle, help to order several powers
And send the hearers weeping to their beds:
As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny
Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND and others, with the prisoners
To Bolingbroke.
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
Pardon me, madam: little joy have I
As well assured Richard their king is dead.
We thank you both: yet one but flatters us,
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:
Beats the keeper
Our prayers do out-pray his, then let them have
If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.
Whose manners still our tardy apish nation
He should have had a volume of farewells,
To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's,
Enter GREEN
And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Welcome, my lord	how far off lies your power?
And dares him to set forward to the fight.
In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
And these same thoughts people this little world,
As much good stay with thee as go with me!
All souls that will be safe fly from my side,
Who was the model of thy father's life.
Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Who strongly hath set footing in this land:
Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
To bury mine intents, but also to effect
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
To NORTHUMBERLAND
Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt,
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
Save back to England, all the world's my way.
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood:
To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle
Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight:
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?
But time will not permit: all is uneven,
Being ne'er so little urged, another way
But 'tis usurp'd: alack the heavy day,
And never brandish more revengeful steel
Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water:
For now hath time made me his numbering clock:
Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches
With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
Then I must not say no.
To God of heaven, King Richard and to me,
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
SCENE II. The DUKE OF YORK's palace.
If God prevent not, I purpose so.
In earth as quiet as thy father's skull:
This feast of battle with mine adversary.
With much ado at length have gotten leave
Comfort's in heaven, and we are on the earth,
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired
And laboured all I could to do him right,
An angry arm against His minister.
Exeunt KING RICHARD II, some Lords, and a Guard
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:
And from the common'st creature pluck a glove,
That swells with silence in the tortured soul,
But stay, here come the gardeners:
Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,
'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king,
He kneels down
Upon his visage, and that all the walls
Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:
Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,
This other Eden, demi-paradise,
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:
Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
In thy heart-blood, though being all too base
Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done
Unto the sovereign mercy of the king,
Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs,
After our sentence plaining comes too late.
Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie
A dearer merit, not so deep a maim
As he is but my father's brother's son,
Whose compass is no bigger than thy head,
Till Norfolk be repeal'd: repeal'd he shall be,
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes,
My lord,--
A brittle glory shineth in this face:
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it
What is the matter?
Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen:
And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,
Yea, at all points, and longs to enter in.
Music
He is our subject, Mowbray, so art thou:
O let no noble eye profane a tear
Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.
I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here,
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast,
Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true,
Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE, HENRY PERCY, and other Lords
The swelling difference of your settled hate:
And these external manners of laments
His noble cousin is right welcome hither,
Suppose the singing birds musicians,
If we be not, show us the hand of God
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,
Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make
Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,
What said our cousin when you parted with him?
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
As thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd
Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.
Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,
Of much less value is my company
And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:
Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon
Of that proud man that did usurp his back?
And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!
ACT IV
Would you have been so brief with him, he would
Here am I left to underprop his land,
Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?
Up, cousin, up, your heart is up, I know,
That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire,
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,
Before I freely speak my mind herein,
Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge,
I will be satisfied, let me see it, I say.
In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!
The setting sun, and music at the close,
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
'Tis full three months since I did see him last,
The open ear of youth doth always listen,
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,
And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon,
Near to the king in blood, and near in love
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know,
With cozening hope: he is a flatterer,
White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps
Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.
It shall be still thy true love's recompense:
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
As my true service shall deserve your love.
Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.
Exit
I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well,
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
And for because the world is populous
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut,
My name be blotted from the book of life,
The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
Divides one thing entire to many objects,
To prove myself a loyal gentleman
Boy, let me see the writing.
Here comes the Duke of York.
'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice,
Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,
Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?
To me for justice and rough chastisement,
Doth more solicit me than your exclaims,
Eating the bitter bread of banishment,
And put on sullen black incontinent:
Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty,
Order the trial, marshal, and begin.
And long live Henry, fourth of that name!
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again,
Enter a Gardener, and two Servants
Thou kill'st me in his life, giving him breath,
These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
As thus, 'Come, little ones,' and then again,
No, no, men living flatter those that die.
I shall not need transport my words by you,
Who, weak with age, cannot support myself:
Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,
A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
Who sets me else? by heaven, I'll throw at all:
Keeps good old York there with his men of war?
Observed his courtship to the common people,
On yon proud man, should take it off again
Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.
That ever fell upon this cursed earth.
Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs
Against the envy of less happier lands,
Enter BUSHY
Base men by his endowments are made great.
He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,
So longest way shall have the longest moans.
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm,
I take my leave before I have begun,
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands
With no less terror than the elements
The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see:
Which our profane hours here have stricken down.
Tell Bolingbroke--for yond methinks he stands--
Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land,
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!
On Wednesday next we solemnly set down
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,
From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found
And dull unfeeling barren ignorance
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
Dear for her reputation through the world,
'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
To serve me last, that I may longest keep
Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!
Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?
Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake,
And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!
If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
What was his reason?
Except the marshal and such officers
For, ere the six years that he hath to spend
Let heaven revenge, for I may never lift
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
And unavoided is the danger now,
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
As confident as is the falcon's flight
To DUKE OF AUMERLE
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
So is it in the music of men's lives.
With letters of your love to her at large.
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
To kill the king at Oxford.
The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
Than Bolingbroke's return to England,
That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
Enter EARL OF SALISBURY and a Welsh Captain
And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.
My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:
I swear.
Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
My body shall make good upon this earth,
Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live?
More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life,
Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent
So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder
For thy great bounty, that not only givest
From plume-pluck'd Richard, who with willing soul
As, though on thinking on no thought I think,
My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
To more approved service and desert.
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.
I will appeach the villain.
You have in manner with your sinful hours
Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,
If that thy valour stand on sympathy,
Bolingbroke!'
That I have been disloyal to thy bed,
You holy clergymen, is there no plot
Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot
My lord, 'tis nothing.
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth
To help him to his grave immediately!
As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.
And not the king exiled thee, or suppose
Flourish. Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE, DUKE OF YORK, with other Lords, and Attendants
They love not poison that do poison need,
As far as land will let me, by your side.
And blindfold death not let me see my son.
No, misery makes sport to mock itself:
To crop at once a too long wither'd flower.
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
No, good my lord, let's fight with gentle words
Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross,
Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.
Help, help, help!
The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,
So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.
Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
The purple testament of bleeding war,
SCENE I. Westminster Hall.
Of fire and water, when their thundering shock
A banish'd traitor: all my treasury
Why should we in the compass of a pale
Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.
The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
He hath not money for these Irish wars,
Enter EXTON and Servants, armed
Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds,
And beat our watch, and rob our passengers,
So dissolute a crew.
Can change their moons and bring their times about
O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
Not like to me, or any of my kin,
Then call them to our presence, face to face,
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
Exit
Enter QUEEN, BUSHY, and BAGOT
May deem that you are worthily deposed.
Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?
Made him a man, and though thou livest and breathest,
And future ages groan for this foul act,
To win thy after-love I pardon thee.
And never show thy head by day nor light.
Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
That power I have, discharge, and let them go
You are my father, for methinks in you
Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled,
In war was never lion raged more fierce,
Had he done so to great and growing men,
A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd
Of double-fatal yew against thy state,
We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,
No matter, then, who see it,
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,
Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man
And I am come to seek that name in England,
After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,
But I will have them, if I once know where.
That would divorce this terror from my heart,'
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.
The means that heaven yields must be embraced,
Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.
Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame,
By his attorneys-general to sue
And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.
Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
Your children yet unborn and unbegot,
Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief,
Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,
Thus play I in one person many people,
My father hath a power, inquire of him
To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail,
Barely in title, not in revenue.
Have any resting for her true king's queen.
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king
I do beseech you, pardon me, I may not show it.
And, Norfolk, throw down his.
Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,
On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.
Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,
Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense,
And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.
If it be so, out with it boldly, man,
Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound,
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
And do thee favours with my royal hands.
Exeunt
When thou wert king, who, travelling towards York,
Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.
He did.
Come, sister,--cousin, I would say--pray, pardon me.
Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.
To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
For now the devil, that told me I did well,
But now the blood of twenty thousand men
Whatever I shall happen to devise.
For I have given here my soul's consent
What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty
I see thy glory like a shooting star
Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say
Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.
None else of name and noble estimate.
O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld
My manors, rents, revenues I forego,
So my untruth had not provoked him to it,
And make high majesty look like itself,
Exit
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin,
O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!
If I be traitor or unjustly fight!
Madam, I'll sing.
And never borrow any tear of thee.
So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,
And plague injustice with the pains of hell.
They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold
Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
Through casements darted their desiring eyes
Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
Further I say and further will maintain
Were enough noble to be upright judge
Which, like unruly children, make their sire
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns
To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour,
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth
Be judged by subject and inferior breath,
With Cain go wander through shades of night,
My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
Our fair appointments may be well perused.
And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts
As thus, to drop them still upon one place,
I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
More health and happiness betide my liege
Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,
And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!
ACT III
The time shall not be many hours of age
To God, the widow's champion and defence.
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast:
Drums, flourish and colours. Enter KING RICHARD II, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, DUKE OF AUMERLE, and Soldiers
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says,
What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt?
So two, together weeping, make one woe.
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
Enter SIR STEPHEN SCROOP
Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there,
When he perceives the envious clouds are bent
He that no more must say is listen'd more
By you unhappied and disfigured clean:
For I am loath to break our country's laws.
There is my gage, the manual seal of death,
To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.
Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.
What sport shall we devise here in this garden,
To grim Necessity, and he and I
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
To do that office of thine own good will
Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.
With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
For that I was his father Edward's son,
My thoughts are minutes, and with sighs they jar
Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.
He may surrender, so we shall proceed
Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
That honourable day shall ne'er be seen.
Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
For aught I know, my lord, they do.
So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife:
Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt
To foreign passages, and in the end,
Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
From where you do remain let paper show.
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown:
I spy life peering, but I dare not say
Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
O, call back yesterday, bid time return,
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
Hadst thou groan'd for him
Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts
Enter DUKE OF AUMERLE
Besides I say and will in battle prove,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
Let it command a mirror hither straight,
Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor,
Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time
I heard you say that you had rather refuse
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Disclaiming here the kindred of the king,
And will maintain what thou hast said is false
As I intend to thrive in this new world,
For the deposing of a rightful king.
My lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days,
From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd
By sight of what I have, your noble company.
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
It may be so, but yet my inward soul
And then be gone and trouble you no more.
And wear it as a favour, and with that
But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared,
As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop:
Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd
Was it not so?
That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land
Add an immortal title to your crown!
And yet I love him.
Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,
Me rather had my heart might feel your love
Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green
Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself,
As if this flesh which walls about our life,
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house,
And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
Fear and be slain, no worse can come to fight:
Here comes my son Aumerle.
Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee,
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
Your grace mistakes, only to be brief
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.
Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
Left I his title out.
For nothing but his majesty's approach.
Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
In murders and in outrage, boldly here,
Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind
And that small model of the barren earth
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
Exit
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
'Tis in reversion that I do possess,
To entreat your majesty to visit him.
Which breathed this poison.
And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:--
Exeunt
That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?
Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,
Depress'd he is already, and deposed
Speak with me, pity me, open the door.
The trumpets sound, and KING RICHARD enters with  his nobles, JOHN OF GAUNT, BUSHY, BAGOT, GREEN, and  others. When they are set, enter THOMAS MOWBRAY in arms, defendant, with a Herald
Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.
Thank, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away.
Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,
Doth not thy embassage belong to me,
If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.
SCENE II. The coast of Wales. A castle in view.
I slew him not, but to my own disgrace
To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
Or any other ground inhabitable,
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
Enter a Servant
Attending but the signal to begin.
More than it is ere foul sin gathering head
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.
My lord, your son was gone before I came.
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,
Well, well, I see the issue of these arms:
Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
Is all unpossible.
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen:
Is not the king's name twenty thousand names?
Expedient manage must be made, my liege,
Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint,
Comes at the last and with a little pin
He kills another. Then Exton strikes him down
Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
SCENE I. Ely House.
Towards our assistance we do seize to us
All must be even in our government.
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
In this your cousin's death.
You thus employ'd, I will go root away
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips,
What is thy sentence then but speechless death,
Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet have learn'd
I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.
Enter, as to the Parliament, HENRY BOLINGBROKE,  DUKE OF AUMERLE, NORTHUMBERLAND, HENRY PERCY, LORD  FITZWATER, DUKE OF SURREY, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE,  the Abbot Of Westminster, and another Lord, Herald, Officers, and BAGOT
And nothing can we call our own but death
What should you fear?
And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
Alack, why am I sent for to a king,
He is our cousin, cousin, but 'tis doubt,
One of our souls had wander'd in the air.
In the devotion of a subject's love,
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.
Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.
To my inheritance of free descent.
Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure
And you can witness with me this is true.
Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray,
And by the worth and honour of himself,
Adding withal how blest this land would be
When the tongue's office should be prodigal
And we are barren and bereft of friends,
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
No, not that name was given me at the font,
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
All pomp and majesty I do forswear,
I was too strict to make mine own away,
Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me
Being so great, I have no need to beg.
No, it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,
That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow:
Though he divide the realm and give thee half,
As brittle as the glory is the face,
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
I fear, I fear,--
I thought you had been willing to resign.
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent:
In me it seems it will make wise men mad.
If he appeal the duke on ancient malice,
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
This is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd,
He was? Why, so! go all which way it will!
Thanks, noble peer,
Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.
At large discoursed in this paper here.
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
Have thy desire.
I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs
Kneels
The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,
Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd
My wretchedness unto a row of pins,
Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,
I had been still a happy king of men.
The badges of his grief and patience,
Complotted and contrived in this land
Direct not him whose way himself will choose:
I have, my liege.
Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,
But since correction lieth in those hands
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years:
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
I know not what to do: I would to God,
Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
From sun to sun: there is my honour's pawn,
should sing.
SCENE VI. Windsor castle.
Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,
Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
What would you have me do? I am a subject,
And not King Richard, thou most beauteous inn,
But ere I last received the sacrament
Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
Parle without, and answer within. Then a flourish.  Enter on the walls, KING RICHARD II, the BISHOP OF  CARLISLE, DUKE OF AUMERLE, SIR STEPHEN SCROOP, and EARL OF SALISBURY
In haste whereof, most heartily I pray
The sly slow hours shall not determinate
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed
Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is,
For well we know, no hand of blood and bone
Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
To prove him, in defending of myself,
In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd,
And make us wade even in our kindred's blood,
Darest with thy frozen admonition
Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light
Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son,
Mean time let this defend my loyalty,
And what loss is it to be rid of care?
Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:
That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity--
Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
His face thou hast, for even so look'd he,
You have misled a prince, a royal king,
To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
Committed by your person and your followers
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood
In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted,
Embrace each other's love in banishment,
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me
My crown I am, but still my griefs are mine:
To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts:
And threat the glory of my precious crown.
As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
To Henry Bolingbroke.
Marshal, demand of yonder champion
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
Exeunt DUKE OF YORK and QUEEN
O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,
From off my hands, here in the view of men
That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both
Which to maintain I would allow him odds,
Till thou give joy, until thou bid me joy,
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.
With mine own hands I give away my crown,
Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls,
To worthy danger and deserved death.
What is become of Bushy? where is Green?
To men in joy, but grief makes one hour ten.
You may my glories and my state depose,
At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day:
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee
I shall remember more. Bid him--ah, what?--
As surely as I live, my lord.
But by fair sequence and succession?
Takes on the point of honour to support
The word is short, but not so short as sweet,
God's is the quarrel, for God's substitute,
The deputy elected by the Lord:
You promised, when you parted with the king,
As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,
Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours,
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage,
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live,
Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight?
Comprising all that may be sworn or said,
Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.
To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal,
The woe's to come, the children yet unborn.
From when this stream through muddy passages
Banish us both and send the king with me.
But heaven hath a hand in these events,
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough,
Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so:
Comfort, my liege, remember who you are.
The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,
You shall not only take the sacrament
God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!
So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,
Before King Richard in his royal lists?
Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.
I am in parliament pledge for his truth
That it shall render vengeance and revenge
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go,
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet
My heart is not confederate with my hand.
To speak with you, may it please you to come down.
Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes
I should to Plashy too,
And hardly kept our countrymen together,
Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
To all his lands and signories: when he's return'd,
O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy!
Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.
And now my tongue's use is to me no more
And not neglected, else, if heaven would,
What, was I born to this, that my sad look
And loving farewell of our several friends.
And free from other misbegotten hate,
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
Which his triumphant father's hand had won,
Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke,
To take advantage of the absent time
A parasite, a keeper back of death,
Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
The cause of his arrival here in arms:
Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.
Things past redress are now with me past care.
In Brittany, received intelligence
And with uplifted arms is safe arrived
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars:
Dispose of you.
They shall not live within this world, I swear,
To do what service am I sent for hither?
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
I'll not be long behind, though I be old,
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:
Save men's opinions and my living blood,
My lord, dispatch, read o'er these articles.
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
Whose duty is deceiveable and false.
To show the world I am a gentleman.
Nay, speak thy mind, and let him ne'er speak more
Aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice.
God for his mercy, what treachery is here!
To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
His charters and his customary rights,
For ever will I walk upon my knees,
And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?
I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell:
To raze one title of your honour out:
And what I want it boots not to complain.
Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.
Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,
And ostentation of despised arms?
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.
Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs:
Appointed to direct these fair designs.
Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE, DUKE OF YORK,  NORTHUMBERLAND, LORD ROSS, HENRY PERCY, LORD WILLOUGHBY, with BUSHY and GREEN, prisoners
Sun that warms you here shall shine on me,
Because my power is weak and all ill left:
My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
With humble and familiar courtesy,
Let's choose executors and talk of wills:
My care is loss of care, by old care done,
Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose,
What must the king do now? must he submit?
To prove it on thee to the extremest point
Men judge by the complexion of the sky
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.
And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined
Looking awry upon your lord's departure,
Will you go along with us?
Yet he is come.
Ascend his throne, descending now from him,
By bare imagination of a feast?
Nor no man's lord, I have no name, no title,
Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
The present benefit which I possess,
That every day under his household roof
No more, but that you read
Then give me leave to go.
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven,
That blood already, like the pelican,
But to the next highway, and there I left him.
Persuades me it is otherwise: howe'er it be,
The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this:
Or not remember what I must be now!
We all have strongly sworn to give him aid,
My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland,
How now! what means death in this rude assault?
Return again, and take an oath with thee.
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.
For suffering so the causes of our wreck.
Exeunt
Coming forward
I see your brows are full of discontent,
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
SCENE III. A royal palace.
And yet we hear no tidings from the king,
A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.
After your late tossing on the breaking seas?
If judgement lie in them, then so do we,
That many have and others must sit there,
A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul
So many greedy looks of young and old
SCENE IV. The same.
Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,
Exeunt HENRY PERCY and Lords
That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.
Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I'll
And here is not a creature but myself,
[Within]  What ho, my liege! for God's sake,
But none returns. For us to levy power
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?
And hope to joy is little less in joy
Which shows like grief itself, but is not so,
I wasted time, and now doth time waste me,
And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace
The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.
To swear him in the justice of his cause.
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:
God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:
An if my word be sterling yet in England,
Not all the water in the rough rude sea
Well, we may meet again.
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!
The worst is death, and death will have his day.
The one my duty owes, but my fair name,
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,
His captain, steward, deputy-elect,
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
Which honour and allegiance cannot think.
Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death,
Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.
Upon his party.
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons
And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
No matter where, of comfort no man speak:
And I, to keep all this.
Despite of death that lives upon my grave,
Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies:
You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
The tediousness and process of my travel:
Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen,
In your lord's scale is nothing but himself,
Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
And straight am nothing: but whate'er I be,
These words hereafter thy tormentors be!
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,
To Bristol castle, which they say is held
But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit,
Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell!
With all swift speed you must away to France.
Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.
That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows:
Thus high at least, although your knee be low.
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,
How he did seem to dive into their hearts
Good aunt, stand up.
Ye favourites of a king: are we not high?
Broken his staff of office and dispersed
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,
Nay, do not say, 'stand up,'
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?
Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu:
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
And he our subjects' next degree in hope.
When time is broke and no proportion kept!
Be confident to speak, Northumberland:
The sullen passage of thy weary steps
With solemn reverence: throw away respect,
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life!
My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word,
That thou shalt do no murder: and wilt thou, then,
And bid her dry her weeping eyes therewith.
No, my good lord, therefore be patient.
Witness my son, now in the shade of death,
Tell him, myself, the mayor and citizens,
Heard ye not what an humble suppliant
And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,
Is this of hers! Lord cardinal, will your grace
On me, that halt and am unshapen thus?
Why wither not the leaves the sap being gone?
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
But nothing spake in warrant from himself.
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
And Richard falls in height of all his pride.
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Harp not on that string, madam, that is past.
Look, what is done cannot be now amended:
Now, they believe it, and withal whet me
God grant we never may have need of you!
Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!'
Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity,
Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.
If not to fight with foreign enemies,
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret-castle,
To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
Come, sirs, convey me to the block of shame,
Flourish. Alarums
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good night to him
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
I never look'd for better at his hands,
To breakfast once forth of my company.
And, by that knot, looks proudly o'er the crown,
That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch:
Than when I met thee last where now we meet:
And, for my name of George begins with G,
SCENE II. The same. Another street.
Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.
Grim-visaged war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front,
I pray thee, pretty York, who told thee this?
But sanctuary children ne'er till now.
To the Queen
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells,
Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,
I promise you, my soul is very jocund
Is it even so? rewards he my true service
Enter CATESBY
Return unto thy lord, commend me to him:
Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself,
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
Richard the second here was hack'd to death,
Why dost thou spit at me?
What! I, that kill'd her husband and his father,
Than of his outward show, which, God he knows,
Encourage him, and show him all our reasons:
The right and fortune of his happy stars,
Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head!
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.
Flatter my sorrows with report of it,
And unrespective boys: none are for me
Within their innocent alabaster arms:
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
But come, my lord, and with a heavy heart,
All comfort that the dark night can afford
And made her widow to a woful bed?
And said, 'Dear brother, live, and be a king'?
O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
Who cried aloud, 'What scourge for perjury
Peace, children, peace! the king doth love you well:
And, in my company, my brother Gloucester,
Besides, the king's name is a tower of strength,
To LADY ANNE
Good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy!
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear,
O, no! alas, I rather hate myself
Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.
Having no more but thought of what thou wert,
O Ratcliff, I have dream'd a fearful dream!
I had rather be a country servant-maid
Re-enter First Murderer
Being pent from liberty, as I am now,
The greatest strength and power he can make,
For want of means, poor rats, had hang'd themselves:
At Stony-Stratford will they be to-night:
Into the blind cave of eternal night.
Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it:
That ever wretched age hath look'd upon.
How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates!
That shall you know hereafter.
They often feel a world of restless cares:
My lord, this argues conscience in your grace,
Proceed thus rashly to the villain's death,
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives,
And be not fix'd in doom perpetual,
He should have braved the east an hour ago
Stand all apart Cousin of Buckingham!
He hath, my lord.
And I believe twill never stand upright
Not I, my lord.
O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
That they may crush down with a heavy fall
I fear no uncles dead.
Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,
And, when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed,
The urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.
Your brother is imprison'd by your means,
Your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
Enter HASTINGS
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
Cursed be the hand that made these fatal holes!
Exeunt CARDINAL and HASTINGS
To, to, to--
But then I sigh, and, with a piece of scripture,
Because my name is George.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
My gracious lord, I'll tell him what you say.
By circumstance, to curse thy cursed self.
Why, there thou hast it: two deep enemies,
From this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven.
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?
I give a sparing limit to my tongue.
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
O Ratcliff, I fear, I fear,--
In your embowell'd bosoms, this foul swine
He sheweth him a paper
he cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it
And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.
As else I would be, were the day prolong'd.
So long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
Would long ere this have met us on the way
What! threat you me with telling of the king?
'Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace:'
Alas, you three, on me, threefold distress'd,
Yet none of you would once plead for his life.
But, tell me, is young George Stanley living?
Of hostile arms! myself myself confound!
If ever any grudge were lodged between us,
Gives signal, of a goodly day to-morrow.
For one that scorn'd at me, now scorn'd of me,
Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
As loath to lose him, not your father's death,
Hither to London, to be crown'd our king.
His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage,
Give me some breath, some little pause, my lord
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,
Exit, with the body
I thank your grace.
Intending deep suspicion: ghastly looks
And, princely peers, a happy time of day!
Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Relent, and save your souls.
And there the little souls of Edward's children
Oh, that deceit should steal such gentle shapes,
Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old.
Small joy have I in being England's queen.
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
Thus hath the course of justice wheel'd about,
Advantaging their loan with interest
Enter two Citizens meeting
But the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds
He should, for that, commit your godfathers:
Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond,
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them,
The scepter'd office of your ancestors,
Where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.
Who knows not that the noble duke is dead?
To be so bouted in this royal presence?
Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
Had you such leisure in the time of death
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul:
It toucheth you, my lord, as much as me.
Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
Have moved his highness to commit me now.
Who knows the lord protector's mind herein?
As I had title in thy noble husband!
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them,
And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,
Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth,
Good morrow, Catesby, you are early stirring
Why, our battalion trebles that account:
A king, perhaps, perhaps,--
Exeunt
God and good angel fight on Richmond's side,
Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, young YORK, QUEEN ELIZABETH, and the DUCHESS OF YORK
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
The slave of nature and the son of hell!
Arise, dissembler: though I wish thy death,
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad!
Was stabb'd with bloody daggers: God, I pray him,
Richard of York! how fares our loving brother?
The flattering index of a direful pageant,
That he will not be won to aught against him.
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
I beseech your graces both to pardon me,
At Chertsey monastery this noble king,
Tush!
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years
I did, with his contract with Lady Lucy,
As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself:
Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!
'Tis more than you deserve,
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
I for an Edward weep, so do not they:
To desperate ventures and assured destruction.
Enter KING RICHARD III
And, as it were far off sound thou Lord Hastings,
And each hour's joy wrecked with a week of teen.
Which now, two tender playfellows to dust,
Ravish our daughters?
Then, by myself--
Enter STANLEY
Is thy name Tyrrel?
With whom my soul is any jot at odds
Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost,
I am his brother, and I love him well.
Exit HASTINGS
That spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines,
God save your lordship!
Awaked you not with this sore agony?
To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
SCENE III. London. A street.
Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard killed him,
The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.
Kneel'd at my feet, and bade me be advised
Eleven hours I spent to write it over,
Chop off his head, man, somewhat we will do:
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen.
Foul wrinkled witch, what makest thou in my sight?
Find in myself no pity to myself?
Have done! for shame, if not for charity.
I'll join with black despair against my soul,
Ay, if yourself's remembrance wrong yourself.
Many good morrows to my noble lord!
Enter KING RICHARD III in arms, with NORFOLK, SURREY, and others
And he himself wander'd away alone,
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
My good lords both, with all the heed I may.
As my ripe revenue and due by birth
Which ever since hath kept my eyes from rest,
To make an act of tragic violence:
O, know you yet, he doth it publicly,
Or else his head's assurance is but frail.
Why, madam, so, no doubt, he is.
As well as I had seen and heard him speak
My charity is outrage, life my shame
If sorrow can admit society,
[To KING RICHARD III]
And that dead saint which then I weeping follow'd,
Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
And I will stand the hazard of the die:
So should we you, if you should be our king.
Lord mayor, the reason we have sent--
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
Your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire,
O bitter consequence,
No other harm but loss of such a lord.
The time to come.
Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
And for his meed, poor lord, he is mew'd up.
Please it your majesty to give me leave,
Her husband, knave: wouldst thou betray me?
Your grace attended to their sugar'd words,
The sun will not be seen to-day,
My Lord, I have consider'd in my mind
As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood
O Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
Loath to depose the child, Your brother's son,
My lord, you do me shameful injury,
I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.
It follows in his thought that I am he.
A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!
To do this ruthless piece of butchery,
Madam, we will attend your grace.
Are you call'd forth from out a world of men
Somewhat against our meaning, have prevented:
Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well.
Look, when he fawns, he bites, and when he bites,
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof.
Give you good morrow, sir.
He prettily and aptly taunts himself:
Is, to determine of the coronation.
That no man shall have private conference,
Hover about her, say, that right for right
Where is he?
Have not to do with him, beware of him,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service,
I was, but I do find more pain in banishment
To bar my master's heirs in true descent,
I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders
My lord, I hear the Marquis Dorset's fled
For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd,
This is the fruit of rashness! Mark'd you not
And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
His regiment lies half a mile at least
Is, like a blasted sapling, wither'd up:
All hail, my sovereign liege!
He makes for England, there to claim the crown.
Good time of day unto my gracious lord!
Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle.
A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death:
'Jockey of Norfolk, be not too bold,
And she shall be sole victress, Caesar's Caesar.
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
I hear his drum: be copious in exclaims.
As closely to conceal what we impart:
To royalize his blood I spilt mine own.
And most assured that he is a friend
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come
if two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
Poor breathing orators of miseries!
Be cheerful, Richmond, for the wronged souls
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
In God's name, cheerly on, courageous friends,
O God, which this blood madest, revenge his death!
SCENE I. Salisbury. An open place.
Up with my tent there! here will I lie tonight,
His gracious pleasure any way therein:
Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward,
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?'
I am determined to prove a villain
Is Clarence dead? the order was reversed.
Too ceremonious and traditional
Madest quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
And all the ruins of distressful times
To QUEEN ELIZABETH
Think you, my lord, this little prating York
Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,
To take is not to give.
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
God give us leisure for these rites of love!
And charged us from his soul to love each other,
Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale?
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen, indeed, of all.
Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough
Would not entreat for life?
Of an one pain, save for a night of groans
Plead what I will be, not what I have been,
Tendering my person's safety, hath appointed
These eyes could never endure sweet beauty's wreck,
If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas,
She spitteth at him
Unto a lineal true-derived course.
And leave the burthen of it all on thee.
For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out
How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment?
treacherous,
And pluck'd two crutches from my feeble limbs,
Enter the Lords to RICHMOND, sitting in his tent
Old wither'd plants, to wail it with their age.
Sitting down by her
And meet me presently at Salisbury.
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH, RIVERS, and GREY
Then, on the other side, I cheque'd my friends.
In that you brook it in, it makes him worse:
No! why?  When he that is my husband now
I like you, lads, about your business straight,
When thou mayst tell thy tale a nearer way?
Kind sister, thanks: we'll enter all together.
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
Good time of day unto your royal grace!
What men of name resort to him?
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
That breathed upon this earth a Christian,
How! wear the garland! dost thou mean the crown?
Saw'st thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?
What think'st thou, then, of Stanley? what will he?
Exeunt
He lives that loves thee better than he could.
Ensuing dangers, as by proof, we see
Oh, poor Clarence!
What tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak?
And, look, when I am king, claim thou of me
How now, what news with you?
Stabs him
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Good morrow, Richmond!
Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
Thy age confirm'd, proud, subdued, bloody,
A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world,
I am unfit for state and majesty,
And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.
Here come the lords of Buckingham and Derby.
I had a Rutland too, thou holp'st to kill him.
Now in good time, here comes the duke himself.
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.
I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal
Even so, an't please your worship, Brakenbury,
We must both give and take, my gracious lord.
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham.
Come, let us to our holy task again.
Ay, ay. thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond:
A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliff!
But I hear, no, they say my son of York
With hate in those where I expect most love!
Could all but answer for that peevish brat?
Who spake of brotherhood? who spake of love?
Blind sight, dead life, poor mortal living ghost,
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?
Dull, unmindful villain,
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse:
No doubt, shall then and till then govern well.
There is no more but so: say it is done,
O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear:
To see you are become so penitent.
Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
But you, my noble lords, may name the time,
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
Are at their beads, 'tis hard to draw them thence,
I cannot blame her: by God's holy mother,
Than I of yours,
What, shall we stab him as he sleeps?
KING RICHARD III starts out of his dream
SCENE VII. Baynard's Castle.
My damned son, which thy two sweet sons smother'd.
One that made means to come by what he hath,
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment:
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom:
Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.
And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen,
Made him my book wherein my soul recorded
Enter BUCKINGHAM and DERBY
Despiteful tidings! O unpleasing news!
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
Either be patient, and entreat me fair,
Exit
Make bold her bashful years with your experience,
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?
I can no longer hold me patient.
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
Good night, good Captain Blunt. Come gentlemen,
My absence doth neglect no great designs,
Enter two Murderers
The peace of England and our persons' safety,
Ha!
I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,
And betwixt them and my lord chamberlain,
I, that was wash'd to death with fulsome wine,
For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.'
At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she
To-day the lords you talk of are beheaded.
No doubt, no doubt, and so shall Clarence too,
Exeunt
And then deny her aiding hand therein,
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
A plague upon you all! His royal person,--
Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
Lest leaden slumber peise me down to-morrow,
Look, how this ring encompasseth finger.
Whilst, in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
You shall have letters from me to my son
Either heaven with lightning strike the
reputation. Come, shall we to this gear?
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
I do beweep to many simple gulls
SCENE I. Before the Tower.
Exit QUEEN ELIZABETH
I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
Lest he that is the supreme King of kings
Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster!
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest,
Farewell: the leisure and the fearful time
That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.
Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied army.
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
Exit
Without her, follows to this land and me,
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?
'Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.
[Aside]  Short summers lightly have a forward spring.
For it is done, my lord.
Enter, on one side, QUEEN ELIZABETH, DUCHESS OF  YORK, and DORSET, on the other, ANNE, Duchess of  Gloucester, leading Lady Margaret Plantagenet, CLARENCE's young Daughter
Self against self: O, preposterous
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above,
We are not safe, Clarence, we are not safe.
Such troops of citizens to speak with him,
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse
The seal I keep: and so betide to me
O, true, good Catesby: bid him levy straight
And summon him to-morrow to the Tower,
And slaughter'd those that were the means to help him,
Say then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins!
What do you think?
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
Their kingdom's loss, my woful banishment,
And pardon us the interruption
He said the truth: and what said Surrey then?
Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
Exit CATESBY
Being nothing like the noble duke my father:
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
And part in just proportion our small strength.
Wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.
I never did her any, to my knowledge.
I thought my mother, and my brother York,
But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,
Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine:
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign
Than ever you or yours were by me wrong'd!
That I myself have done unto myself?
SCENE II. Before Lord Hastings' house.
Who, I, my lord I we know each other's faces,
Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw,
Upon my part shall be unviolable.
And so, God give you quiet rest to-night!
A beggar, brother?
Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee!
To Salisbury, the rest march on with me.
Arm, fight, and conquer, for fair England's sake!
Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since,
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it:
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.
Sirs, take up the corse.
Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd,
How they at Pomfret bloodily were butcher'd,
Windy attorneys to their client woes,
A milk-sop, one that never in his life
Is the king dead? the empire unpossess'd?
Before the times of change, still is it so:
My lord,
Good angels guard thy battle! live, and flourish!
Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
Ghost
Take heed, for he holds vengeance in his hands,
Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.
I marvel why her grace did leave it out.
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
This Edward, whom our manners term the prince.
Thus high, by thy advice
Dabbled in blood, and he squeak'd out aloud,
Which in their summer beauty kiss'd each other.
Upon the stroke of four.
[Aside to a stander by]
Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive
Let me march on, and not offend your grace.
I say, without characters, fame lives long.
What stays had I but they? and they are gone.
Until your lordship came to see his death,
The purple sap from her sweet brother's body
To give your censures in this weighty business?
Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.
And, for unfelt imagination,
But thou didst kill my children.
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?
What, art thou afraid?
And those who have the wit to claim the place:
All several sins, all used in each degree,
Have patience, madam: there's no doubt his majesty
[Aside]  And supper too, although thou know'st it not.
Exit
How dost thou feel thyself now?
Nor no one here, for curses never pass
With many more confederates, are in arms.
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
Were to incense the boar to follow us
Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!
Insulting tyranny begins to jet
Enter LORD STANLEY
I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham,--
To be thus taunted, scorn'd, and baited at:
Would tempt unto a close exploit of death?
And therefore level not to hit their lives.
But meditating with two deep divines,
I do lament the sickness of the king.
Or with the clamorous report of war
Where in that nest of spicery they shall breed
Advance thy halbert higher than my breast,
But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.
Thy life hath that dishonour'd.
All men, I hope, live so.
For first he was contract to Lady Lucy--
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick,
The presentation of but what I was,
May fright the hopeful mother at the view,
To study fashions to adorn my body:
You should not blemish it, if I stood by:
A liberal rewarder of his friends:
So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers,
Or, if she be accused in true report,
Ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on
That he was never trained up in arms.
What heir of York is there alive but we?
To save her life, I'll say she is not so.
Think on the Tower and me: despair, and die!
Exit
My gracious sovereign, on the western coast
And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
Because that I am little, like an ape,
How now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee?
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?
Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold
Blush, Blush, thou lump of foul deformity,
So say we too, but not by Edward's wife,
To her I go, a jolly thriving wooer.
But come, my lord, let us away.
That this same very day your enemies,
[To RICHMOND]
Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep
His nurse! why, she was dead ere thou wert born.
But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
Which never dreamt on aught but butcheries:
And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy,
So I by that, it is my day, my life.
which laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
King Henry's issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
First, mighty sovereign, let me know your mind,
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby.
And egally indeed to all estates,--
Taken from Paul's to be interred there,
That none of you may live your natural age,
But, my good lord, your grace's word shall serve,
Long kept in Bretagne at our mother's cost?
'Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet
Neighbours, God speed!
Be of good cheer: mother, how fares your grace?
Of blessed sanctuary! not for all this land
What canst thou swear by now?
Which they upon the adverse party want.
Exeunt
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
Stabb'd in my angry mood at Tewksbury?
What says he?
You have no cause.
Would all were well! but that will never be
Art thou my son?
With such deep contempt made I him king for this?
My Lord of York will still be cross in talk:
But yet, you see how soon the day o'ercast.
God will revenge it. But come, let us in,
And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.
To RICHMOND
Withal I did infer your lineaments,
You speak too bitterly.
not to kill the duke.
Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death!
O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
Send her a story of thy noble acts,
Then he was urged to tell my tale again,
Enter DERBY and SIR CHRISTOPHER URSWICK
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me,
Her life is only safest in her birth.
As you would beg, were you in my distress
To turn their own points on their masters' bosoms:
And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen,
From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.
And his enforcement of the city wives,
Nor more can you distinguish of a man
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
And in his full and ripen'd years himself,
Daughter, well met.
Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.
And I in better state than e'er I was.
Tell her thou madest away her uncle Clarence,
Better it were they all came by the father,
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
Where is my lord protector? I have sent for these
Good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly?
What though I kill'd her husband and her father?
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
Your highness shall repose you at the Tower:
When scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands
Holy King Henry, and thy fair son Edward,
Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships!
A miserable by the death of him
Why or for what these nobles were committed
Why, then resolve me whether you will or no.
Sitting down with them
Perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree
But look'd not on the poison of their hearts :
If this inducement force her not to love,
With daily prayers all to that effect.
By silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?
Have I since your departure had, my lords.
Who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?
That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.
This is the day wherein I wish'd to fall
But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
Why should calamity be full of words?
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must:
Cry 'God save Richard, England's royal king!'
Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
What, think You we are Turks or infidels?
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
Exit
We live to tell it you, the subtle traitor
Give me some ink and paper.
Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power:
Your honour hath no shriving work in hand.
What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!
I'll not believe but they ascend the sky,
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
For then this land was famously enrich'd
The loss you have is but a son being king,
That long have frown'd upon their enmity!
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
Exit
And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
That looks not heavily and full of fear.
Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.
And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured
I'll win our ancient right in France again,
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.
Why stand'st thou still, and go'st not to the duke?
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
Of blind forgetfulness and dark oblivion.
I live to look upon their tragedy.
Exeunt
When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.
What were you snarling all before I came,
Such terrible impression made the dream.
To RICHMOND
Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret: who comes here?
Exeunt
Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
By God's fair ordinance conjoin together!
Enter BUCKINGHAM, DERBY, HASTINGS, the BISHOP OF  ELY, RATCLIFF, LOVEL, with others, and take their seats at a table
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.
Exeunt
Enter a Scrivener, with a paper in his hand
Enter the Ghost of CLARENCE
March on, join bravely, let us to't pell-mell
If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Would fain have come with me to meet your grace,
And cited up a thousand fearful times,
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
Are they not now upon the western shore.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
And with all speed post with him toward the north,
Enter GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM, DERBY, HASTINGS, and RATCLIFF
Flourish. Exeunt
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here
[Reads]
And take thy office from thee, on my peril.
And for his dreams, I wonder he is so fond
Doth comfort thee in thy sleep: live, and flourish!
Like high-rear'd bulwarks, stand before our faces,
Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.
I fear our happiness is at the highest.
Got my lord chamberlain his liberty.
Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.
And the compact is firm and true in me.
Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?
Well met, my lord, I am glad to see your honour.
For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day.
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment:
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter:
The imperial metal, circling now thy brow,
To wail the tide, as her mother doth.
But, sure, I fear, we shall ne'er win him to it.
Felt so much cold as over shoes in snow?
And his physicians fear him mightily.
This proffer'd benefit of dignity,
Richard!
Make war upon themselves, blood against blood,
The spacious world cannot again afford
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,
The precedent was full as long a-doing:
Is the determined respite of my wrongs:
[To KING RICHARD III]
What! we have many goodly days to see:
And cry 'O Clarence, my unhappy son!'
'Tis figured in my tongue.
Then never man was true.
This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up,
Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd,
Upon them! victory sits on our helms.
Well, well, put up your sword.
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle,
the judgment-day.
By nothing, for this is no oath:
Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,
Which, in the day of battle, tire thee more
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
From Tamworth thither is but one day's march.
The crown, usurp'd, disgraced his kingly glory.
'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord,
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess!
To fight against that bloody homicide.
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
ACT V
Exit
Therefore, good mother,--I must can you so--
O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,
A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
It is too heavy for your grace to wear.
We are the queen's abjects, and must obey.
You have been factious one against the other,
Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn
The brother blindly shed the brother's blood,
Either thou wilt die, by God's just ordinance,
I do beseech you send for some of them.
I thought thou hadst been resolute.
If ancient sorrow be most reverend,
For happy wife, a most distressed widow,
Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha! must we not?
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
So.
As for another secret close intent,
'Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,' quoth I,
How that the guilty kindred of the queen
Why dost thou run so many mile about,
How chance the prophet could not at that time
As I can say nay to thee for myself,
I'll make a corse of him that disobeys.
But yet I run before my horse to market:
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
What, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain?
My lord?
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good-night to him,
Exit Lord Mayor
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me?
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
Enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM, in rotten armour, marvellous ill-favoured
His majesty
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say,
What you have been ere now, and what you are,
Made peace enmity, fair love of hate,
And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve
Exit
Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.
Who are they that complain unto the king,
'Lo, thus' quoth Dighton, 'lay those tender babes:'
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
Remember whom you are to cope withal,
What from your grace I shall deliver to him.
And hear your mother's lamentation!
In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
It cannot be avoided but by this,
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,
My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
Clarence hath not another day to live:
My lord, you shall o'er-rule my mind for once.
I see, as in a map, the end of all.
Richard except, those whom we fight against
When I should mount with wings of victory:
But for my brother not a man would speak,
As one that are best acquainted with her humour.
Go you before, and I will follow you.
The broken rancour of your high-swoln hearts,
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.
But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.
Will to your mother, to entreat of her
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
I would be so triumphant as I am?
If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
Enter young YORK, HASTINGS, and the CARDINAL
Is all unknown to me, my gracious lady.
I did not see your grace: humbly on my knee
For the instalment of this noble duke
For in this sin he is as deep as I.
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder,
Think that thy babes were fairer than they were,
that I found, it beggars any man that keeps it: it
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror,
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing-while,
The father rashly slaughter'd his own son,
To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
His answer was, the people were not wont
If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar:
is turned out of all towns and cities for a
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.
Throws him his purse
Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
A messenger from the Lord Stanley.
Anthony Woodville, her brother there,
I want more uncles here to welcome me.
Of what degree soever, with his brother.
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
When they should serve their sovereign in the west?
How fares the prince?
I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest!
To chide my fortune, and torment myself?
Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
But penetrable to your. kind entreats,
Lend favourable ears to our request,
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.
Whose unavoided eye is murderous.
And look to have it yielded with all willingness.
Yea, are you so brief?
With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
More than to Richmond?  for the selfsame heaven
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
Exeunt LADY ANNE, TRESSEL, and BERKELEY
Their woes are parcell'd, mine are general.
Was it not she and that good man of worship,
And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch,
How have you slept, my lord?
Advancing
Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
Day, yield me not thy light, nor, night, thy rest!
So cunning and so young is wonderful.
Gloucester and Buckingham.
What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.
Stanley, he is your wife's son well, look to it.
Grandam, we can, for my good uncle Gloucester
Then I salute you with this kingly title:
Vouchsafe to wear this ring.
Who sued to me for him? who, in my rage,
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog,
Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard
Which, I presume, he'll take in gentle part.
That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part,--
Comfort, dear mother: God is much displeased
I prithee, hear me speak.
which may make you and him to rue at the other.
If so, then be not tongue-tied: go with me.
What, marry, may she?
This noble isle doth want her proper limbs,
Exit
Fool, fool! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.
So many miseries have crazed my voice,
And you my good lords, both have well proceeded,
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,
Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
My gracious sovereign?
If not to answer, you might haply think
Enter STANLEY
God bless your grace with health and happy days!
Your friends are up, and buckle on their armour.
If that our noble father be alive?
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and the DUCHESS OF YORK
Of these supposed-evils, to give me leave,
Catesby, o'erlook the walls.
Your beauty: which did haunt me in my sleep
As if the golden fee for which I plead
Why, then he is alive.
But thus his simple truth must be abused
And teach me how to curse mine enemies!
It is, and wants but nomination.
Cold friends to Richard: what do they in the north,
A husband and a son thou owest to me,
Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother,
And take our leave, until we meet in heaven.
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.
Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.
When have I injured thee? when done thee wrong?
Because they have been still mine enemies:
If I have kill'd the issue of your womb,
Brother, we done deeds of charity,
How now! what news with you?
The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
I hold my life as dear as you do yours,
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband,
[To DORSET]
By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
I go, and if you plead as well for them
And when this arm of mine hath chastised
And kingly government of this your land,
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
What, marry, may she! marry with a king,
Enter LOVEL and RATCLIFF, with HASTINGS' head
His grace not being warn'd thereof before:
And, by just computation of the time,
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon,
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
being well-advised.
Yet witness what you hear we did intend:
Never, my lord, therefore prepare to die.
Then, taking him from thence that is not there,
Such proclamation hath been made, my liege.
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long,
Clarence comes.
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways,
But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
SCENE V. Lord Derby's house.
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
'This general applause and loving shout
Off with his son George's head!
For I am she, and altogether joyless.
Then know, that from my soul I love thy daughter.
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
My part thereof that I have done to her.
Conscience is but a word that cowards use,
She may help you to many fair preferments,
When I was last in Holborn,
You may partake of any thing we say:
A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,
Let me sit heavy on thy soul to-morrow!
To thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Which would be so much the more dangerous
And cheer his grace with quick and merry words.
To hear her prayers for them, as now for us
Consisting equally of horse and foot,
Those men you talk of came into my mind.
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
O, but remember this another day,
O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!
Take up the sword again, or take up me.
Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror!
Ye cannot reason almost with a man
Then, if you fight against God's enemy,
Fainting, despair, despairing, yield thy breath!
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!
Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops:
Even where his lustful eye or savage heart,
O thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile,
The most arch of piteous massacre
If they were his assistants, yea or no,
To be your comforter when he is gone.
For hateful deeds committed by myself!
Well thought upon, I have it here about me.
And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,
Gazed each on other, and look'd deadly pale.
Hath in the tables of his law commanded
Is there a murderer here?  No. Yes, I am:
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
Clarence, whom I, indeed, have laid in darkness,
Inquire me out some mean-born gentleman,
Towards Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.
Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king,
All scatter'd in the bottom of the sea:
Beget your happiness, be happy then,
If he be leaden, icy-cold, unwilling,
A bloody tyrant and a homicide,
[To KING RICHARD III]
In deadly hate the one against the other:
By such despair, I should accuse myself.
Told the sad story of my father's death,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
But smother'd it within my panting bulk,
So, now prosperity begins to mellow
The king, of his own royal disposition,
Drum afar off
I'll tell you what, I think it is our way,
Madam, his majesty doth call for you,
Call them again, my lord, and accept their suit.
Persuade the queen to send the Duke of York
With some men else, who think themselves as safe
Relent! 'tis cowardly and womanish.
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!
There is no other way
If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
That my woe-wearied tongue is mute and dumb,
Well are you welcome to the open air.
Then is he more beholding to you than I.
My lord, the army of the Duke of Buckingham--
Thou slander of thy mother's heavy womb!
To your good prayers will scarcely say amen.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
But who comes here? the new-deliver'd Hastings?
It's nine o'clock.
That makes us wretched by the death of thee,
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle,
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
My lord: he doth entreat your grace,
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
I may not suffer you to visit them,
To whom in all this presence speaks your grace?
Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault,
Prove me, my gracious sovereign.
Best fitteth my degree or your condition
Out of my sight! thou dost infect my eyes.
To stay him from the fall of vanity:
My husband lost his life to get the crown,
My gracious lady, go,
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier,
With thy embracements to my wife's allies,
No doubt, my lord.
And, in good time, here comes the noble duke.
Right,
O God, I fear thy justice will take hold
Well, my dread lord, so must I call you now.
Live, and beget a happy race of kings!
Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects:
But I had rather kill two enemies.
She hath had too much wrong, and I repent
My father's death--
Ay, what's o'clock?
But by his mother was perforce withheld.
Enter GLOUCESTER aloft, between two Bishops. CATESBY returns
By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams,
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!
In brief,--for so the season bids us be,--
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!
For false forswearing and for murder too:
Take that, until thou bring me better news.
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
Erroneous vassal! the great King of kings
And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.
I saw good strawberries in your garden there
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
Take that, and that: if all this will not do,
And thus my battle shall be ordered:
God grant him health! Did you confer with him?
I took him for the plainest harmless creature
They withdraw into the tent
What we will do, we do upon command.
Go, gentleman, every man unto his charge
Exit CATESBY
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
The usurping helmets of our adversaries!
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard,
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
For what is he they follow?  truly, gentlemen,
With all our harts.
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king!
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.
Long mayst thou live to wail thy children's loss,
Take on himself the sovereignty thereof:
Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.
Withdraw you hence, my lord, I'll follow you.
'Tis like enough, for I stay dinner there.
For yesternight by Catesby was it brought me,
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
'Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward.
Thyself thyself misusest.
And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house
I should not live long after I saw Richmond.
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
My brother slew no man, his fault was thought,
Sorry I am my noble cousin should
Tush, that was in thy rage:
What thinkest thou, will our friends prove all true?
To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!
Let them not live to taste this land's increase
My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
But praying, to enrich his watchful soul:
mutinies in a man's bosom, it fills one full of
I would to God that the inclusive verge
My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold:
But repetition of what thou hast marr'd,
No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess,
Definitively thus I answer you.
After the battle let George Stanley die.
This interchange of love, I here protest,
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother
Come, bring forth the prisoners.
Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert
Was never mother had so dear a loss!
Enter the Sheriff, and BUCKINGHAM, with halberds, led to execution
More direful hap betide that hated wretch,
Tell him, and spare not: look, what I have said
Give mine the benefit of seniory,
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
As I remember, Henry the Sixth
Yet who's so blind, but says he sees it not?
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
South from the mighty power of the king.
Art thou so hasty? I have stay'd for thee,
To my proceedings, if, with pure heart's love,
For I shall never speak to thee again.
I never did incense his majesty
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
Well, but what's o'clock?
Which, by the sign thereof was termed so.
Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead!
Enter BRAKENBURY
And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by.
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
I, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty
I have not that alacrity of spirit,
And that so lamely and unfashionable
What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.
Urge the necessity and state of times,
At any time have recourse unto the princes.
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Although they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs,
And some ten voices cried 'God save King Richard!'
Thy mother's name is ominous to children.
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
That would reduce these bloody days again,
For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps
At Tewksbury: despair, therefore, and die!
Under what title shall I woo for thee,
Stay, madam, I must speak a word with you.
For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.
Urge neither charity nor shame to me:
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Not as protector, steward, substitute,
The bleeding witness of her hatred by,
We follow'd then our lord, our lawful king:
That would I learn of you,
That hand, which, for thy love, did kill thy love,
It is a quarrel most unnatural,
Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace, and wake in joy,
Enter GLOUCESTER
A royal battle might be won and lost
So do not I: go, coward as thou art.
Divided in their dire division,
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
Hark! he stirs: shall I strike?
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
A pair of bleeding-hearts, thereon engrave
This sudden stag of rancour I misdoubt:
Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?
Bear with her weakness, which, I think proceeds
For one being fear'd of all, now fearing one,
Flock to their aid, and still their power increaseth.
The queen your mother, and your brother York,
The envious slanders of her false accusers,
My dagger, little cousin? with all my heart.
On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety?
Enter RATCLIFF, CATESBY following
Come, come, you mock me, this is not the way
Madam, yourself are not exempt in this,
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
Say, she shall be a high and mighty queen.
What is thy news then?
Are all things fitting for that royal time?
I shall return before your lordship thence.
And look you get a prayer-book in your hand,
Than a great queen, with this condition,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,
Provokes this deluge most unnatural.
At our entreaties, to amend that fault!
Enter the Lord Mayor and CATESBY
Let me sit heavy on thy soul to-morrow,
You shall, my lord.
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
With dull unwilligness to repay a debt
Where you shall find me well accompanied
Come, I have heard that fearful commenting
But he, poor soul, by your first order died,
His soul thou canst not have, therefore be gone.
But shall we wear these honours for a day?
Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!
I every day expect an embassage
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
But none can cure their harms by wailing them.
But shall I live in hope?
But now, I tell thee--keep it to thyself--
Hidest thou that forehead with a golden crown,
What, had he so?
Again shall you be mother to a king,
O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts,
Speak and look back, and pry on every side,
In him that did object the same to thee,
SCENE III. Pomfret Castle.
My mind is changed, sir, my mind is changed.
John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
As he will lose his head ere give consent
Which God revenge!
For what offence?
And turns the sun to shade, alas! alas!
Bid my guard watch, leave me.
The traitor speak, and timorously confess
Have been beholding to him in his life,
And so doth mine: I muse why she's at liberty.
A gentle cousin, were it light enough.
Let us survey the vantage of the field
Lash hence these overweening rags of France,
Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust,
Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.
He shall espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
Would be her lord? or shall I say, her uncle?
Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful:
And give us notice of his inclination:
Ere you were queen, yea, or your husband king,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone,
If not by war, by surfeit die your king,
Rideth a puissant navy, to the shore
Good aunt, you wept not for our father's death,
With this dead-killing news!
When thou comest thither--
If you do fight against your country's foes,
A dire induction am I witness to,
The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest:
Even he that makes her queen who should be else?
Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women:
Five have I slain to-day instead of him.
Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction:
dangerous thing, and every man that means to live
Be brief, lest that be process of thy kindness
If without peril it be possible,
And who is England's king but great York's heir?
Of the young prince your son: send straight for him
No news so bad abroad as this at home,
Thy Edward he is dead, that stabb'd my Edward:
That foul defacer of God's handiwork,
O, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life,
Hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night.
Think on Lord Hastings: despair, and die!
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw
Exit BRAKENBURY
Exit
Nor none that live, I hope.
I cry you mercy: I mean the lord protector.
Go, by this token: rise, and lend thine ear:
Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess.
No, boy.
While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
Here pitch our tents, even here in Bosworth field.
of remorse in me.
A man, as you are.
Cousin of Buckingham, and you sage, grave men,
Every man's conscience is a thousand swords,
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life,
And make me happy in your unity.
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable
Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's?
What is his name?
Die in his youth by like untimely violence!
As being got, your father then in France,
Why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
Was it more precious to me than 'tis now:
Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife,
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper,
And ask'd the mayor what meant this wilful silence:
Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Edward, my lord, your son, our king, is dead.
Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft,
In the seat royal of this famous isle?
We speak no treason, man: we say the king
To those whose dealings have deserved the place,
And stand betwixt two churchmen, good my lord,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy.
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours,
Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer,
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
And never in my life, I do protest,
Which haply by much company might be urged:
Return, good Catesby, to thy lord again,
I go.
That Julius Caesar was a famous man,
Thy honour, state and seat is due to me.
What of his heart perceive you in his face
This day those enemies are put to death,
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
And thou unfit for any place but hell.
They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,
Woe to the land that's govern'd by a child!
Thine being but a moiety of my grief,
Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm,
Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen,
What is't your highness' pleasure I shall do at
If you will live, lament, if die, be brief,
For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.
Without control, listed to make his prey.
Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me,
For making me, so young, so old a widow!
Re-enter Page, with TYRREL
Whom their o'er-cloyed country vomits forth
The trumpets sound. Enter the young PRINCE EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM, CARDINAL, CATESBY, and others
Dorset, embrace him, Hastings, love lord marquess.
Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!
To reconcile me to his friendly peace:
[To KING RICHARD III]
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV sick, QUEEN  ELIZABETH, DORSET, RIVERS, HASTINGS, BUCKINGHAM, GREY, and others
Which by my presence might have been concluded.
Because that, like a Jack, thou keep'st the stroke
As I intend to prosper and repent,
Ten the clock there. Give me a calendar.
And fall somewhat into a slower method,
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days,
Bade me rely on him as on my father,
And descant on mine own deformity:
And finds the testy gentleman so hot,
Whereof the king my brother stood possess'd.
No, to their lives bad friends were contrary.
And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night.
Or let me die, to look on death no more!
My words are dull, O, quicken them with thine!
Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity
His honour and myself are at the one,
Advance our standards, set upon our foes
I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid:
Hath he so long held out with me untired,
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey: and so 'twill do
At any time, to grace my stratagems.
Imagine I have said farewell already.
Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brain!
Look on my forces with a gracious eye,
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,
By circumstance, but to acquit myself.
I will with all expedient duty see you:
Enter RICHMOND, OXFORD, BLUNT, HERBERT, and others, with drum and colours
But in your daughter's womb I bury them:
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
That high All-Seer that I dallied with
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
And from the cross-row plucks the letter G.
Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head
Come, lead me to the block, bear him my head.
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears:
God give your graces both
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
I promise you, I scarcely know myself:
And even here brake off, and came away.
More than the infant that is born to-night
The earldom of Hereford, and the moveables
Let us be led within thy bosom, Richard,
That it may be this day read over in Paul's.
Which of you, if you were a prince's son,
To comfort Edward with our company.
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
To LADY ANNE
Which now bear evidence against my soul,
How?
Which she shall purchase with still lasting war.
Decline all this, and see what now thou art:
He little thought of this divided friendship:
Which God defend that I should wring from him!
Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider,
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league
Neighbour, well met: whither away so fast?
That do conspire my death with devilish plots
The insatiate greediness of his desires,
I shall be reconciled to him again.
I cannot nor I will not yield to you.
What, is he in his bed?
Murder, stem murder, in the direst degree,
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,
More than my brother: 'Ay,' quoth my uncle
Into the tumbling billows of the main.
O, belike his majesty hath some intent
And leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death!
That you depart and lay no hands on me
Infer fair England's peace by this alliance.
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine
Exeunt
The supreme seat, the throne majestical,
If is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.
Why, so: now have I done a good day's work:
It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
And not provoked by any suitor else,
What shall I say more than I have inferr'd?
Where is kind Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?
Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk:
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Deformed, unfinish'd, sent before my time
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves!
About a prophecy, which says that 'G'
Thou slewest my husband Henry in the Tower,
As all the world is cheered by the sun,
Thou art the cause, and most accursed effect.
The rest, that love me, rise and follow me.
Were best he do it secretly, alone.
His issue disinherited should be,
God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
Of golden sovereignty, acquaint the princess
Then speak at once what is it thou demand'st.
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
If that your moody discontented souls
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers,
What is't o'clock?
Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks
I promise, I am afraid to hear you tell it.
Where, after I have solemnly interr'd
Death and destruction dog thee at the heels,
And die, ere men can say, God save the queen!
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
Let them have scope: though what they do impart
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
Whispers
Faith, none, but Humphrey Hour, that call'd
Gloucester,
The king my uncle is to blame for this:
They, for their truth, might better wear their heads
Exeunt all but BUCKINGHAM
But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach
A dream of what thou wert, a breath, a bubble,
As yet I do not: but, as I can learn,
Enter the Lord Mayor and his train
Enter CATESBY
Enter, to his tent, KING RICHARD III, NORFOLK, RATCLIFF, CATESBY, and others
No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well,
Gramercy, fellow: there, drink that for me.
Who shall reward you better for my life
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
'Tis done, my gracious lord.
Thou hadst but power over his mortal body,
And make poor England weep in streams of blood!
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
By marrying her which I must reach unto.
Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
The fear of that withholds my present aid.
His majesty hath straitly given in charge
Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal:
Think, how thou stab'dst me in my prime of youth
The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.
That Anne my wife is sick and like to die:
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower,
Then patiently hear my impatience.
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
Makes him to send, that thereby he may gather
Your dicipline in war, wisdom in peace,
Ratcliff, about the mid of night come to my tent
Whilst Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered
I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Rivers. that died at Pomfret! despair, and die!
England hath long been mad, and scarr'd herself,
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,
Tell me, good grandam, is our father dead?
That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.
Ay, my lord,
Alarums. Enter KING RICHARD III
God make your majesty joyful as you have been!
Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind.
And every hour more competitors
Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top,
Villain, thou know'st no law of God nor man:
To tell us whether they will come or no!
To try if thou be current gold indeed
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
For your best health and recreation.
That at her hands which the king's King forbids.
'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.
ACT I
The benefit thereof is always granted
My lord, he fears you mean no good to him.
Ay, boy.
We may digest our complots in some form.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I prey,
Offended us you have not, but the king.
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!
I will converse with iron-witted fools
The son of Clarence have I pent up close,
Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
With this, my lord, myself have nought to do.
Who saw the sun to-day?
Untouch'd, or slightly handled, in discourse
So I am, to let him live.
Look to the drawbridge there!
The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.
And I'll salute your grace of York as mother,
I'll send some packing that yet think not on it.
And call'd it Rougemont: at which name I started,
Where are thy tenants and thy followers?
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
To visit him to-morrow or next day:
A mother only mock'd with two sweet babes,
And the dire death of my two sons and brothers?
Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate
But on his knees at meditation,
O, in the battle think on Buckingham,
His master's son, as worshipful as he terms it,
Will conquer him! awake, and win the day!
Came to my tent, and cried on victory:
Say on, my loving lord.
Amen.
And so say I.
The late demand that you did sound me in.
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones!
Now fair befal thee and thy noble house!
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford,
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
But leave it all to God. whither away?
I will not trust you, sir.
My prayers on the adverse party fight,
I think the duke will not be spoke withal.
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
Say that I slew them not?
'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.
Enter the Ghost of LADY ANNE
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake: Why, sirs,
In God's name what are you, and how came you hither?
A flourish, trumpets! strike alarum, drums!
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian,
These famish'd beggars, weary of their lives,
Naught to do with mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow,
That scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble.
O, then began the tempest to my soul,
Told me, the king, provoked by the queen,
And so he vanish'd: then came wandering by
Exit
Enter DERBY to RICHMOND in his tent, Lords and others attending
Profaned, dishonour'd, and the third usurp'd.
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
But the plain devil and dissembling looks,
Well,
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death:
But lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together,
No, to White-Friars, there attend my coining.
My grandam told me he was murdered there.
Enter another Messenger
And by the bright track of his fiery car,
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
Myself disgraced, and the nobility
And he that hath commanded is the king.
Strike the drum.
The news I have to tell your majesty
Than death can yield me here by my abode.
O, let me make the period to my curse!
Before I positively herein:
Go on before, I'll talk with this good fellow.
Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,
They would restrain the one, distain the other.
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business,
You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
If you do free your children from the sword,
Be the attorney of my love to her:
No more shall be the neighbour to my counsel:
[To KING RICHARD III]
well endeavours to trust to himself and to live
Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
With all your just proceedings in this cause.
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul!
But we will plant some other in the throne,
And little Ned Plantagenet, his son?
That ever yet this land was guilty of.
With what his valour did enrich his wit,
Before I be convict by course of law,
Do then: but I'll not hear.
When I am cold in zeal to yours.
Made glorious summer by this sun of York,
Exit BUCKINGHAM with the Citizens
A thing devised by the enemy.
Exit TYRREL
Alarum: excursions. Enter NORFOLK and forces fighting, to him CATESBY
The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son,
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him,
A greater gift! O, that's the sword to it.
[To KING RICHARD III]
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes:
That in his nonage council under him,
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest,
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
A grandam's name is little less in love
May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
My liege, in Kent the Guildfords are in arms,
To shun the danger that his soul divines.
And I nothing to back my suit at all,
And only in that safety died her brothers.
The weary way hath made you melancholy.
By thee was punched full of deadly holes
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet.
Me seemeth good, that, with some little train,
This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings,
That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,
He is not lolling on a lewd day-bed,
He wonders to what end you have assembled
And, if I fall not in my deep intent,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and, in falling,
You should enjoy, were you this country's king,
What think'st thou? is it not an easy matter
No less importing than our general good,
A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue,
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.
I hope so.
[Within]  Who knocks at the door?
Then cursed she Richard. O, remember, God
And that a winged Mercury did bear:
What stay had I but Edward? and he's gone.
Are at my service, like enforced smiles,
Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
Exit CATESBY
Never came poison from so sweet a place.
And, like a traitor to the name of God,
Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale
To the disgrace and downfall of your house:
To RICHMOND
More than I have said, loving countrymen,
ACT III
No, to the dignity and height of honour
Meantime, God grants that we have need of you:
Nay, wherefore should they, since that I myself
And he that slew them fouler than he is:
They have not been commanded, mighty sovereign:
What men of name are slain on either side?
He lived from all attainder of suspect.
Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
It is not yet near day. Come, go with me,
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
This day had plotted, in the council-house
His wit set down to make his valour live
And thy assistance, is King Richard seated,
Dispatch, my lord, the duke would be at dinner:
For now they kill me with a living death.
Under our tents I'll play the eaves-dropper,
Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done:
Thou camest on earth to make the earth my hell.
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop
Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads,
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge,
For this, consorted with the citizens,
When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks,
By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust
And by their vehement instigation,
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Amongst this princely heap, if any here,
That is the butt-end of a mother's blessing:
Then be your eyes the witness of this ill:
The sweetest sleep, and fairest-boding dreams
And fall thy edgeless sword: despair, and die!
I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now
That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death,
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,
Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us?
Exeunt
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me:
Namely, to Hastings, Derby, Buckingham,
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve:
And came I not at last to comfort you?
Upon the stroke of four.
Be he unto me! this do I beg of God,
It cannot be, for when I parted with him,
In God's name, speak: when is the royal day?
A begging prince what beggar pities not?
I did, my lord.
Exeunt
How say you sir? Can you deny all this?
As I had rather hide me from my greatness,
'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral,
SCENE III. Bosworth Field.
They thus directed, we will follow
For, by the way, I'll sort occasion,
That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
For we to-morrow hold divided councils,
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
The waters swell before a boisterous storm.
When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till
To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd:
O Harry's wife, triumph not in my woes!
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast,
For I myself have many tears to wash
Enter, on the other side of the field, RICHMOND,  Sir William Brandon, OXFORD, and others. Some of the Soldiers pitch RICHMOND's tent
To bear her burthen, whether I will or no,
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms:
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.
Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaced.
And I, in such a desperate bay of death,
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife,
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
What, do you tremble? are you all afraid?
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurp'd,
Dream of success and happy victory!
Was ever woman in this humour woo'd?
Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face,
Which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time,
Alas, I am the mother of these moans!
The mayor is here at hand: intend some fear,
To make the perfect period of this peace.
By strangling thee in her accursed womb
To take her in her heart's extremest hate,
Touches me deeper than you can imagine.
By heaven, I come in perfect love to him,
Misused ere used, by time misused o'erpast.
I would they were, that I might die at once,
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
Dispute not with her, she is lunatic.
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
If not, that, I being queen, you bow like subjects,
And to give notice, that no manner of person
SCENE IV. London. The palace.
Unless I have mista'en his colours much,
Lord, Lord! methought, what pain it was to drown!
We wait upon your grace.
Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand,
Aside
But what, is Catesby gone?
live long.
Being the right idea of your father,
And both the princes had been breathing here,
And I myself secure in grace and favour.
As 'twere retail'd to all posterity,
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy
I, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion,
Had not been broken, nor my brother slain:
And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
That Anne, my wife, is sick and like to die:
To-morrow, then, we will attend your grace:
To whom I will retail my conquest won,
The new-heal'd wound of malice should break out,
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward,
My lord!
Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine!
Princes have but their tides for their glories,
Unmeritable shuns your high request.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me,
That ever enter'd in a drowsy head,
You having lands, and blest with beauteous wives,
Of ten times double gain of happiness.
In this just suit come I to move your grace.
And I would have it suddenly perform'd.
None good, my lord, to please you with the hearing,
Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
Suspect me, that I mean no good to him:
You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest,
Would you enforce me to a world of care?
Dost grant me, hedgehog? then, God grant me too
Remember our reward, when the deed is done.
And yet within these five hours lived Lord Hastings,
O princely Buckingham I'll kiss thy hand,
Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls:
Be executed in his father's sight.
Have a tongue to doom my brother's death,
Ghosts
And thou a kingdom, all of you allegiance:
Which issued from my other angel husband
Enter RATCLIFF
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.
I never sued to friend nor enemy,
O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone
The sorrow that I have, by right is yours,
As miserable by the life of thee
Upon what cause?
Ratcliff!
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Curse not thyself, fair creature thou art both.
No, by my troth, my lord.
That they who brought me in my master's hate
Now civil wounds are stopp'd, peace lives again:
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love.
I'll to the king, and signify to him
If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
Talkers are no good doers: be assured
From which even here I slip my weary neck,
But on thy side I may not be too forward
Who sues to thee and cries 'God save the queen'?
And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
We will unite the white rose and the red:
O Brakenbury, I have done those things,
To have him suddenly convey'd away.
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
By the suggestion of the queen's allies,
Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
Out on you, owls! nothing but songs of death?
Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.
That can less hide his love or hate than he,
These English woes will make me smile in France.
As ours by murder, to make him a king!
First if all obstacles were cut away,
I call thee not.
I will not dine until I see the same.
True, when avoided grace makes destiny:
I never was nor never will be false.
Now cheer each other in each other's love
The citizens are mum and speak not a word.
damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.
I know not whether to depart in silence,
As thou and I, who, as thou know'st, are dear
And promise them success and victory.
Have taken sanctuary: the tender prince
Or by the father there were none at all,
O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!
Exeunt
Exit
To RATCLIFF
How doth the prince, and my young son of York?
As 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems,
What is't o'clock?
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
This sickly land might solace as before.
From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
How do I thank thee, that this carnal cur
Take all the swift advantage of the hours,
If heaven will take the present at our hands.
Aside
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
That you shall be new-christen'd in the Tower.
Enter another Messenger
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,
As blameful as the executioner?
As I am subtle, false and treacherous,
And so most joyfully we take our leave.
And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so.
Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh!
Murder thy breath in the middle of a word,
Truly, the souls of men are full of dread:
Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother,
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!
That tempers him to this extremity.
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH, with her hair about her ears, RIVERS, and DORSET after her
Grossly grew captive to his honey words
I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower.
thy conscience flies out.
Fight, gentlemen of England! fight, bold yoemen!
I am not in the giving vein to-day.
Remember Margaret was a prophetess.'
Thus far into the bowels of the land
The ground of your ill-will, and so remove it.
To Bona, sister to the King of France.
And shall the same give pardon to a slave?
And therefore is he idle?
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth to-day,
And have prevail'd as much on him as you.
Awake, and think our wrongs in Richard's bosom
Little.
I could have given my uncle's grace a flout,
That waits upon your grace?
I go: and towards three or four o'clock
Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while!
SCENE III. The palace.
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
When I was mortal, my anointed body
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
And then begin again, and stop again,
Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural,
There's many a gentle person made a Jack.
How now! what news?
Ready, with every nod, to tumble down
He is.
Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn
Bad news, by'r lady, seldom comes the better:
A murderous villain, and so still thou art.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
With politic grave counsel, then the king
Nor none so bad, but it may well be told.
The earldom of Hereford and the moveables
Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep:
To quicken your increase, I will beget
Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,
So just is God, to right the innocent.
Whose hand soever lanced their tender hearts,
And still, as you are weary of the weight,
Why, then All-Souls' day is my body's doomsday.
I'll claim that promise at your grace's hands.
Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women
He hugg'd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs,
I cannot make you what amends I would,
He cannot live, I hope, and must not die
Where and what time your majesty shall please.
If we be conquer'd, let men conquer us,
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
And thou shalt tell the process of their death.
The garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue,
My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.
Oh for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
Which well I am assured I have not done,
The king! why, who's that?
What sayest thou? speak suddenly, be brief.
And then, to dry them, gavest the duke a clout
But so it must be, if the king miscarry.
Nay, now dispatch, 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward,
Some patient leisure to excuse myself.
Enter CLARENCE and BRAKENBURY
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Exeunt
Edward thy son, which now is Prince of Wales,
Not to kill him, having a warrant for it, but to be
A scum of Bretons, and base lackey peasants,
A care-crazed mother of a many children,
And, in good time, here comes the sweating lord.
The manner and the purpose of his treason,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens,
Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death,
Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,
Exit
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life,
Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious,
If I revolt, off goes young George's head,
Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel.
About it, for it stands me much upon,
'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower:
Shall we hear from thee, Tyrrel, ere we sleep?
SCENE II. The camp near Tamworth.
He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
To fight on Edward's party for the crown,
God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!
And to that end we wish'd your lord-ship here,
Therefore take with thee my most heavy curse,
O earth, which this blood drink'st revenge his death!
How now, Catesby, what says your lord?
A sign of dignity, a garish flag,
Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
This is the day that, in King Edward's time,
Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit,
That, his apparent open guilt omitted,
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
Hear me a word,
But what's the matter, Clarence?  may I know?
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning:
And say it is the queen and her allies
My lord, I claim your gift, my due by promise,
Bid me farewell.
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.
[Aside]  Amen, and make me die a good old man!
God's wrong is most of all.
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,
God bless your grace! we see it, and will say it.
What says Lord Stanley? will he bring his power?
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,
So long as hell and Richard likes of it.
Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
Call for some men of sound direction
Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.
Where are thy children? wherein dost thou, joy?
Exeunt
So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!
Eighty odd years of sorrow have I seen,
The leisure and enforcement of the time
Your highness told me I should post before.
That ever graced me in thy company?
To-morrow, in mine opinion, is too sudden,
For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all
And be not peevish-fond in great designs.
March on, march on, since we are up in arms,
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,
Here she lets fall the sword
To win our daughter.
So smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue,
Myself to be a marvellous proper man.
As 'twere triumphing at mine enemies,
They embrace
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.
Drawing him aside
That is too cold in thinking of it now.
Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so,
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
Armed in proof, and led by shallow Richmond.
In him there is a hope of government,
What were I best to say? her father's brother
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
To base declension and loathed bigamy
She may, Lord Rivers! why, who knows not so?
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
Art thou, indeed?
Enter CATESBY
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
To cut off those that have offended him.
I crave your blessing.
I prophesy the fearful'st time to thee
He dreamt to-night the boar had razed his helm:
But beg one favour at thy gracious hand,
I, as I may--that which I would I cannot,--
Only reserved their factor, to buy souls
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
No, no, by God's good grace his son shall reign.
When holy and devout religious men
For Edward my son, which was Prince of Wales,
These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
within me.
'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.
He is my son, yea, and therein my shame,
I'll have her, but I will not keep her long.
The deed you undertake is damnable.
By any in this presence, I desire
O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
Environ'd me about, and howled in mine ears
To Richmond, in those parts beyond the sea
For I, too fond, might have prevented this.
Now is the winter of our discontent
By false intelligence, or wrong surmise,
Infer the bastardy of Edward's children:
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?
I say, my lord, they have deserved death.
That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.
Thou troublest me, am not in the vein.
Were for myself: and so, my lord, adieu.
God keep the prince from all the pack of you!
And left thee but a very prey to time,
Stands apart
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
I trembling waked, and for a season after
No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
Hover about me with your airy wings
I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him,
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,
When men are unprepared and look not for it.
is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
'Tis death to me to be at enmity,
Aside
without it.
Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?
He striketh him
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
To RICHMOND
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
Having God, her conscience, and these bars
If ever he have wife, let her he made
The last was I that felt thy tyranny:
And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers
My lord!
Death, desolation, ruin and decay:
Which so long sunder'd friends should dwell upon:
So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!
And now, instead of mounting barded steeds
For this will out, and here I must not stay.
Rumour it abroad
Even of your mettle, of your very blood,
Unmanner'd dog! stand thou, when I command:
If you refuse it,--as, in love and zeal,
O, who hath any cause to mourn but I?
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.
Clarence still breathes, Edward still lives and reigns:
Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty
Upon my body with their hellish charms?
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
And all their ministers attend on him.
Hark! I hear their drum.
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
Why then, by God--
Richard loves Richard, that is, I am I.
Now fills thy sleep with perturbations
Exeunt
Humbly complaining to her deity
Of what you promised me.
True, noble prince.
Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood,
Farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory!
Give me another horse: bind up my wounds.
'Thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferr'd,'
I'll strive, with troubled thoughts, to take a nap,
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
Until the duke take order for his burial:
Enter NORFOLK
O, that your young nobility could judge
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
Alack. I love myself. Wherefore?  for any good
God hold it, to your honour's good content!
Have I enjoy'd the golden dew of sleep,
But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismay'd:
Confound your hidden falsehood, and award
Are daily given to ennoble those
Hath he set bounds betwixt their love and me?
Not dallying with a brace of courtezans,
Nay, do not pause, for I did kill King Henry,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
I would I knew thy heart.
Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves.
That Edward still should live! 'True, noble prince!'
In God's name, what art thou?
Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
Or, like obedient subjects, follow him
O my accursed womb, the bed of death!
That I, being govern'd by the watery moon,
'When he,' quoth she, 'shall split thy heart with sorrow,
Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother:
No, mighty liege, therefore mistrust me not.
For they account his head upon the bridge.
Enter CATESBY
Come, come, my boy, we will to sanctuary.
That thus I have resign'd my charge to you.
I shall despair. There is no creature loves me,
For one commanding all, obey'd of none.
Did it to help thee to a better husband.
O, that thou wouldst as well afford a grave
What, my gracious lord?
Forbear your conference with the noble duke.
That God, the law, my honour and her love,
Hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul,
My lord, will't please you pass along?
O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Show
And then return lamenting to my love.
Thy Clarence he is dead that kill'd my Edward,
And doubt you not, right noble princes both,
Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
O no, my reasons are too deep and dead,
Think upon Vaughan, and, with guilty fear,
My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks:
What, ho! my lord!
Where is thy conscience now?
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower,
She may, my lord, for--
Desire the earl to see me in my tent:
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous,
Cousin, thou wert not wont to be so dull:
The which will I, not all so much for love
Arm, arm, my lord, the foe vaunts in the field.
By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
I will not rise, unless your highness grant.
Re-enter BISHOP OF ELY
When I have most need to employ a friend,
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Oh, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,
For I repent me that the duke is slain.
Ay me, I see the downfall of our house!
To overgo thy plaints and drown thy cries!
God will in justice ward you as his soldiers,
Why grow the branches now the root is wither'd?
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
But, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure?
And he to yours, and all of you to God's!
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?
I must have patience to endure the load:
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end:
Relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
Found that the issue was not his begot,
Young York he is but boot, because both they
And lessen'd be that small, God, I beseech thee!
in the next room.
Why, so you are, my thrice renowned liege.
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother
This fair alliance quickly shall call home
Bishop of Exeter, his brother there,
How canst thou woo her?
Successively from age to age, he built it?
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty
Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick,
It is, my lord.
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
And, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excused,
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their grave.
Even in so short a space, my woman's heart
So sweet is zealous contemplation.
And in record, left them the heirs of shame.
[To KING RICHARD III]
[Aside]  So wise so young, they say, do never
makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it
Yea, Richard, when I know, for I protest
What do I fear?  myself?  there's none else by:
Brother, farewell: I will unto the king,
Ay, my good lord.
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
Than in my greatness covet to be hid,
Made prize and purchase of his lustful eye,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
Held in contempt, whilst many fair promotions
Off with his head! Now, by Saint Paul I swear,
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
Name him.
Once more, adieu: be valiant, and speed well!
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
To set my brother Clarence and the king
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear.
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
On you or yours,
And the beholders of this tragic play,
His resemblance, being not like the duke,
Marry, my lord, lest, by a multitude,
A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!
My other self, my counsel's consistory,
That she may long live here, God say amen!
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
So dear I loved the man, that I must weep.
No, then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.
A man that loves not me, nor none of you.
I would he knew that I had saved his brother!
Not shine to-day! Why, what is that to me
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
And many more of noble fame and worth:
I will perform it to enfranchise you.
I go. Write to me very shortly.
But how or in what place I do not know.
Ay, my good lord, and no one in this presence
Which we have noted in you to your kin,
This is All-Souls' day, fellows, is it not?
Let's want no discipline, make no delay,
Re-enter KING RICHARD, RATCLIFF, Attendants and Forces
To be revenged on him that loveth you.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
Enter the DUCHESS OF YORK, with the two children of CLARENCE
Then know, it is your fault that you resign
To doom the offenders, whatsoever they be
Bear her my true love's kiss, and so, farewell.
Because a bard of Ireland told me once
That would with treason wound this fair land's peace!
Ratcliff, my lord, 'tis I. The early village-cock
SCENE IV. The Tower of London.
See, where he stands between two clergymen!
I doubt not but his friends will fly to us.
will change, 'twas wont to hold me but while one
You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth,
God pardon them that are the cause of it!
Enter the Ghost of King Henry VI
Upon the stroke of ten.
Take heed you dally not before your king,
So full of dismal terror was the time!
My lord, your promise for the earldom,--
O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out
I for a Clarence weep, so doth not she:
Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand,
And we will both together to the Tower,
Heir to the crown, meaning indeed his house,
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?
Our archers shall be placed in the midst
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
Were never orphans had so dear a loss!
I had an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
The petty rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
Cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights?
With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
In her consists my happiness and thine,
O bloody Richard! miserable England!
And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
Here comes his servant: how now, Catesby,
Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee
Of that unsatiate Edward, noble York
I do, my lord, but long I shall not stay
What, go you toward the Tower?
The king is angry: see, he bites the lip.
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot,
Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
False to his children or his wife's allies
Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.
Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
That, if this rule were true, he should be gracious.
I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me,
Then fly. What, from myself?   Great reason why:
But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
Well, sir, as you guess, as you guess?
It is a reeling world, indeed, my lord,
That never slept a quiet hour with thee,
I, like a child, will go by thy direction.
Nearer in bloody thoughts, but not in blood,
BRAKENBURY reads it
Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
The king enacts more wonders than a man,
Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary
Where every horse bears his commanding rein,
Exeunt
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
Yet this good comfort bring I to your grace,
I do beseech you, either not believe
The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown,
And, in good time, here the lieutenant comes.
Which in a set hand fairly is engross'd,
Abase foul stone, made precious by the foil
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
That without desert have frown'd on me,
Of you, Lord Rivers, and, Lord Grey, of you,
Withdraw, my lord, I'll help you to a horse.
Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
Since I have set my friends at peace on earth.
Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
And see another, as I see thee now,
In sign of league and amity with thee:
White-liver'd runagate, what doth he there?
And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,
Or that we would, against the form of law,
Consorted with that harlot strumpet Shore,
Exeunt
That in the sty of this most bloody boar
Here, my lord.
Who answer'd him, they came from Buckingham.
As index to the story we late talk'd of,
Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter
The mighty dukes
But I disdain'd it, and did scorn to fly:
Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard:'
Where should be graven, if that right were right,
Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast
I hear that news, my lord.
An if I live until I be a man,
Nor you, as we are, loyal.
I will be mild and gentle in my speech.
Hath twice done salutation to the morn,
Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,
In deep designs and matters of great moment,
Wert thou not banished on pain of death?
Then, tell me, what doth he upon the sea?
My lord?
But, God be thank'd, there's no need of me,
With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments,
That I may live to say, The dog is dead!
O excellent devise! make a sop of him.
And I for comfort have but one false glass,
Re-enter BUCKINGHAM and the rest
Enter the Ghosts of RIVERS, GRAY, and VAUGHAN
Thy broken faith hath made a prey for worms.
To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
So thrive I in my dangerous attempt
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog!
Edward and York, then haply she will weep:
My babes were destined to a fairer death,
When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.
O, when, I say, I look'd on Richard's face,
Dream on thy cousins smother'd in the Tower:
And lay those honours on your high deserts.
And ample interchange of sweet discourse,
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick,
How far I am from the desire thereof.
Exit
Of England's chair, where he is falsely set,
Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland--
Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred,
And so swear I, my lord
No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you,
My lord?
She may do more, sir, than denying that:
I thank my God for my humility.
Even to the general all-ending day.
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
My lord of Ely!
Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!
Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.
Well, let it strike.
Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven?
Enter another Citizen
'Tis time to speak, my pains are quite forgot.
Why, that was he.
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Because, my lord, we would have had you heard
Now will I in, to take some privy order,
Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood,--
I wish't might fall on me, when I was found
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
I have already.
Devised at first to keep the strong in awe:
By heaven, I think there's no man is secure
Teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made
To seek the empty, vast and wandering air,
Ere a fortnight make me elder,
I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me!
O, I have pass'd a miserable night,
You cannot guess who caused your father's death.
Who hath descried the number of the foe?
Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.
Tell him his fears are shallow, wanting instance:
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory
Methought I had, and often did I strive
God keep you from them, and from such false friends!
Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry
And I unjustly too, must grant it you
Upon his party for the gain thereof:
Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
And here he comes.
He sends ye not to murder me for this
Alas, why would you heap these cares on me?
I had a Harry, till a Richard kill'd him:
He whispers in his ear
I partly know the man: go, call him hither.
But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens
I now repent I told the pursuivant
For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood
I am their fathers mother, I will see them.
That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.
Enter HASTINGS
My lord!
A bachelor, a handsome stripling too:
Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
My uncle Rivers talk'd how I did grow
To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
More pity that the eagle should be mew'd,
Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour,
For me to joy and weep their gain and loss:
To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
From whence this present day he is deliver'd?
Go, then my mother, to thy daughter go
Hark! a drum.
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
O, now I want the priest that spake to me:
It is, my lord.
If they have done this thing, my gracious lord--
And you shall understand from me her mind.
Makes me most forward in this noble presence
Which here we waken to our country's good,
The princes both make high account of you,
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
Your state of fortune and your due of birth,
So she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter,
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Lord mayor,--
Exeunt
Besides, he says there are two councils held,
To CATESBY
The Lord protect him from that kingly title!
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!
Thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.
I wis your grandam had a worser match.
And will, no doubt, tempt him to any thing.
As thou hast made me by my dear lord's death!
And often up and down my sons were toss'd,
And so in me, and so, I think, in all:
When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,
Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,
Rail on the Lord's enointed: strike, I say!
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
And no worldly suit would he be moved,
During the wars of York and Lancaster
Limit each leader to his several charge,
I cannot think it. Hark! what noise is this?
You say that Edward is your brother's son:
Away towards Salisbury! while we reason here,
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
Where are the evidence that do accuse me?
And that may be determined at the one
Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fetch'd
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray.
Upon record, my gracious lord.
A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin.
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
O gentle villain, do not turn away!
Fly to the duke:
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
He is all the mother's, from the top to toe.
Now, for my life, she's wandering to the Tower,
Methought their souls, whose bodies Richard murder'd,
And he would love me dearly as his child.
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
The king, that calls your beauteous daughter wife.
These eyes that never shed remorseful tear,
But, soft! here come my executioners.
ACT II
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Shall, for thy love, kill a far truer love,
Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
And all my armour laid into my tent?
SCENE II. The palace.
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains
Incapable and shallow innocents,
There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here,
To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.
Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us all embrace:
And be a happy mother by the deed.
I thank his grace, I know he loves me well,
So do I ever:
By Him that raised me to this careful height
And entertain some score or two of tailors,
I, even I: what think you of it, madam?
To part the queen's proud kindred from the king.
And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind,
Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs:
Enter the Ghost of Prince Edward, son to King Henry VI
Enter KING RICHARD III, marching, with drums and trumpets
The fitter for the King of heaven, that hath him.
Exit
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
Happy were England, would this gracious prince
Yet whether you accept our suit or no,
I rather do beseech you pardon me,
Hath not yet dived into the world's deceit
O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester!
Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby?
Shall these enjoy our lands?  lie with our wives?
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne
My lord, good morrow, good morrow, Catesby:
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?
But as successively from blood to blood,
For I myself am not so well provided
[To KING RICHARD III]
Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks,
To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy,
Exit GLOUCESTER
Touch'd you the bastardy of Edward's children?
Now thy proud neck bears half my burthen'd yoke,
Like trees bedash'd with rain: in that sad time
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine!
And so was I: I'll bear you company.
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
In common worldly things, 'tis call'd ungrateful,
The history of all her secret thoughts:
Slander myself as false to Edward's bed,
Thy womb let loose, to chase us to our graves.
Yea, and forswore himself,--which Jesu pardon!--
That look into me with considerate eyes:
Enter a Messenger
'Tis more than we deserve, or I expect.
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
Or earth, gape open wide and eat him quick,
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.
Save that, for reverence to some alive,
He that doth naught with her, excepting one,
Which didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
This prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserved it,
Margaret.
For joyful mother, one that wails the name,
And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband
From the corruption of abusing times,
His curses, then from bitterness of soul
I am too childish-foolish for this world.
You do him injury to scorn his corse.
Welcome my lord, I dance attendance here,
The weary sun hath made a golden set,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
Come, now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,
Tell him the queen hath heartily consented
When such bad dealings must be seen in thought.
At the lower end of the hall, hurl'd up their caps,
Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims
Will I withal endow a child of thine,
Madam, have comfort: all of us have cause
Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh
To the corruption of a blemished stock:
And, after many lengthen'd hours of grief,
Were factious for the house of Lancaster,
Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham,
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen:
My voice is now the king's, my looks mine own.
To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
A Sennet. Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM and CATESBY
The tender love I bear your grace, my lord,
To be her men and wear her livery:
Some lay in dead men's skulls, and, in those holes
And when I have my meed, I must away,
Enter GLOUCESTER
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud:
And all good men of this ungovern'd isle.
Look'd pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
His oration to his Army
Oh for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!
To RICHMOND
Come, madam, come, I in all haste was sent.
Let us consult upon to-morrow's business
That from the prime creation e'er she framed.'
Let me have open means to come to them,
I call'd thee then vain flourish of my fortune,
Come, cousin, canst thou quake, and change thy colour,
Whom envy hath immured within your walls!
Exeunt some with KING EDWARD IV and QUEEN MARGARET
Which grieves me when I see my shame in him.
You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain,
The King is sickly, weak and melancholy,
Who hath committed them?
A book of prayers on their pillow lay,
All for our vantage. Then, in God's name, march:
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind,
What, is my beaver easier than it was?
As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?
We are to reap the harvest of his son.
With all my heart, and much it joys me too,
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
All may be well, but, if God sort it so,
So deal with him as I prove true to you.
Enforced us to this execution?
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
Plantagenet.
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
Daring an opposite to every danger:
But have been waked by his timorous dreams.
What news abroad?
SCENE V. The Tower-walls.
And seem a saint, when most I play the devil.
For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,
And yet his punishment was cruel death.
Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
But not, as I am, royal.
I cry thee mercy:
And shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd.
To-morrow, or next day, they will be here.
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter:
By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!
Misconstrue us in him and wail his death.
Ay, millstones, as be lesson'd us to weep.
O, let me speak!
Why, madam, have I offer'd love for this
The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
Enter QUEEN MARGARET
Here, Hastings, I will never more remember
O, cut my lace in sunder, that my pent heart
And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage.
If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.
And I will love thee, and prefer thee too.
Which if thou please to hide in this true bosom.
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
By the false faith of him I trusted most,
[To KING RICHARD III]
To sit about the coronation.
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.
If I be so disgracious in your sight,
Exeunt all but RICHMOND
Who made thee, then, a bloody minister,
Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozen'd
How now! what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not?
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Enter the Ghost of HASTINGS
No doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt
So will it, madam till I lie with you.
Now, fair befall you! he deserved his death,
Edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
As I intend more good to you and yours,
This conduct to convey me to the Tower.
Exeunt all but HASTINGS, RATCLIFF, and LOVEL
There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
Dispatch, the limit of your lives is out.
Are come from visiting his majesty.
Come, muster men: my counsel is my shield,
The time will come when thou shalt wish for me
That bear this mutual heavy load of moan,
Enter a Messenger
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.
Marry, God forbid his grace should say us nay!
Neglect the visitation of my friends.
Nor I no more of his, than you of mine.
And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee,
And now in peace my soul shall part to heaven,
You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord,
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty prelate
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Oh, he is young and his minority
Stabb'd by the selfsame hand that made these wounds!
I'll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence,
Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,
Darest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
And his contract by deputy in France,
Is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters,
Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world,
So that, betwixt their tides and low names,
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham,
My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
Had graced the tender temples of my child,
Poor heart, adieu! I pity thy complaining.
And die in terror of thy guiltiness!
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands:
Till George be pack'd with post-horse up to heaven.
We come to use our hands and not our tongues.
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine:
The Ghosts vanish
My lord?
For standing by when Richard stabb'd her son.
Upon the hatches: thence we looked toward England,
You may deny that you were not the cause
And will she yet debase her eyes on me,
SCENE VI. The same.
As much to you, good sister! Whither away?
And so once more return and tell his grace.
To-morrow in the battle think on me,
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
What may she not? She may, yea, marry, may she--
Enter a Pursuivant
And so will I.
detects him: 'tis a blushing shamefast spirit that
Exeunt CLARENCE, BRAKENBURY, and Guard
Most mighty sovereign,
No, first let's reason with him.
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Cursed be the heart that had the heart to do it!
But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,
Richmond is on the seas.
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost:
Uncertain way of gain! But I am in
Unarm'd, and unresolved to beat them back:
And stops he now for breath?
But say, my lord, it were not register'd,
How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
To meet you on the way, and welcome you.
Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
Yet one thing more, good Blunt, before thou go'st,
But didst thou see them dead?
Then, in the name of God and all these rights,
Where be the thronging troops that follow'd thee?
He may command me as my sovereign,
Adieu, poor soul, that takest thy leave of it!
And at the other is my servant Catesby
If by the way they be not fought withal.
Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
But touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off,
I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.
They could not speak, and so I left them both,
Madam, farewell.
Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
That I may see my shadow as I pass.
To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.
Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot,
And then hurl down their indignation
I have been long a sleeper, but, I hope,
Compare dead happiness with living woe,
Of this most grievous guilty murder done!
To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.
And not be Richard that hath done all this.
Madam, with all my heart.
Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,
I'll draw the form and model of our battle,
As I am made by my poor lord and thee!
What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable!
Must gently be preserved, cherish'd, and kept:
We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass,
For God's sake, let not us two be behind,
Only for saying he would make his son
Now Margaret's curse is fallen upon my head,
But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
Devised impeachments to imprison him :
slaughter'd,
This found I on my tent this morning.
The curse my noble father laid on thee,
The advancement of your children, gentle lady.
Had rather have us win than him they follow:
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!
Let it go, there's few or none will entertain it.
Throng to the bar, crying all, Guilty! guilty!
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
What, thou?
That in submission will return to us:
My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.
Why looks your grace so heavily today?
Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?
Or any creeping venom'd thing that lives!
His tyranny for trifles, his own bastardy,
Meantime, have patience.
And must she die for this? O, let her live,
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
There, at your meet'st advantage of the time,
Gloucester,
That were the cause of my imprisonment.
True ornaments to know a holy man.
I cannot tell: the world is grown so bad,
Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,
Young Edward lives: think now what I would say.
Bad is the world, and all will come to nought,
Go, go, up to the leads, the lord mayor knocks.
Melting with tenderness and kind compassion
I'll tell him what you say, my lord.
And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
Lord hastings was to her for his delivery?
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
Which once,' quoth Forrest, 'almost changed my mind,
One raised in blood, and one in blood establish'd,
Who prays continually for Richmond's good:
To bring this tidings to the bloody king.
The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind,
Upon the innocent and aweless throne:
Methought the souls of all that I had murder'd
Out, devil! I remember them too well:
Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.
Marry, that with no man here he is offended,
You envy my advancement and my friends':
All circumstances well considered.
O, he hath kept an evil diet long,
To-morrow will it please you to be crown'd?
With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ,
And I in all unwillingness will go.
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death?
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.
When he doth bid good morrow with such a spirit.
As well we know your tenderness of heart
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty!
Pour all your tears! I am your sorrow's nurse,
Ghost
And I will pamper it with lamentations.
First, he commends him to your noble lordship.
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
Making them women of good carriage:
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
take it in what sense thou wilt.
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.
By any other name would smell as sweet,
Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
Kisses him
Look, sir, here comes the lady towards my cell.
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Suspecting that we both were in a house
none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
So stumblest on my counsel?
Not having that, which, having, makes them short.
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:
Afore me! it is so very very late,
To call hers exquisite, in question more:
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
What is the matter?
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
Stop there, stop there.
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
No better term than this,--thou art a villain.
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied,
his tongue,
why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver
Because he married me before to Romeo?
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Enter Citizens,  and c
In what vile part of this anatomy
There stays a husband to make you a wife:
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
O, by this count I shall be much in years
That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio's soul
Enter ROMEO and BALTHASAR, with a torch, mattock,  and c
To bid me trudge:
Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,
She falls upon her bed, within the curtains
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--
You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
Staying for thine to keep him company:
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
With instruments upon them, fit to open
Exit Romeo
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
Not to his father's, I spoke with his man.
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
Exit
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
I will, and know her mind early to-morrow,
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Well said, my hearts! You are a princox, go:
I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Meaning, to court'sy.
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
You are looked for and called for, asked for and
Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO
I am not I, if there be such an I,
Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
Come you to make confession to this father?
More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
The fee-simple! O simple!
Enter, at the other end of the churchyard, FRIAR LAURENCE, with a lantern, crow, and spade
To answer that, I should confess to you.
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He
Hold, get you gone, be strong and prosperous
To help me sort such needful ornaments
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
And then I ran away to call the watch.
But to be frank, and give it thee again.
Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
And soar with them above a common bound.
Rest you merry!
Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of
So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
Like death, when he shuts up the day of life,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit,
Good heart, at what?
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.
SCENE III. Juliet's chamber.
Uneven is the course, I like it not.
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Marry, bachelor,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
I'll not to bed to-night, let me alone,
Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
Either withdraw unto some private place,
As I intended, for it wrought on her
out, what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Pursued my humour not pursuing his,
Enter ROMEO
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
He goeth down
What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.
Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this
What mean these masterless and gory swords
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
I am hurt.
Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
TYBALT under ROMEO's arm stabs MERCUTIO, and flies with his followers
lay knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Do with their death bury their parents' strife.
And hither shall he come: and he and I
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE, with a basket
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Anon!
The county will be here with music straight,
O, teach me how I should forget to think.
that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
For shame, bring Juliet forth, her lord is come.
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
But to the earth some special good doth give,
This doth not so, for she divideth us:
As dearly as my own,--be satisfied.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Unto my cell.
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Peter, stay at the gate.
Never was seen so black a day as this:
What misadventure is so early up,
Exit
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
Hence from Verona art thou banished:
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Thy lips are warm.
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
Where serpents are, chain me with roaring bears,
How well my comfort is revived by this!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
Or else depart, here all eyes gaze on us.
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
That shall she, marry, I remember it well.
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
fairer face.
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live,
Musicians waiting. Enter Servingmen with napkins
sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?
Farewell, my coz.
Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,
SCENE V. Capulet's orchard.
How canst thou try them so?
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
They fight, TYBALT falls
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two households, both alike in dignity,
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
there rust, and let me die.
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
God's bread! it makes me mad:
Evermore showering? In one little body
thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nay, good goose, bite not.
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
Enter ROMEO
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
Is but a little way above our heads,
I think it best you married with the county.
Your high displeasure: all this uttered
Enter Nurse
Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
Here in the churchyard, yet I will adventure.
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
And hire post-horses, I will hence to-night.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Despised substance of divinest show!
As will disperse itself through all the veins
I could not send it,--here it is again,--
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not,
I strike quickly, being moved.
Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!
Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
O noble prince, I can discover all
And do not interrupt me in my course.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
She will indite him to some supper.
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
Here's goodly gear!
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.
Is fair and honest, and in his mistres s' name
Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
Out of her favour, where I am in love.
And I for winking at your discords too
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Whither?
That I have worn a visor and could tell
Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
Exeunt JULIET and Nurse
O, I am slain!
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Deny thy father and refuse thy name,
Your lady's love against some other maid
Benedicite!
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish,
What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
Enter Chorus
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
Exeunt
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
She would be as swift in motion as a ball,
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
[Within]         Ho, daughter! are you up?
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
So many guests invite as here are writ.
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Enter CAPULET, with JULIET and others of his house, meeting the Guests and Maskers
I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none.
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back,
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, with five or six Maskers, Torch-bearers, and others
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
Doting like me and like me banished,
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,
But I will watch you from such watching now.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
To stop the inundation of her tears,
The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend
the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
Enter BALTHASAR, booted
Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble,
O son! the night before thy wedding-day
Too familiar
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,
'Tis almost morning, I would have thee gone:
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
And 'twixt them rushes, underneath whose arm
How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?
To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!
brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
Drawing his sword
face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels
We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again,
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Re-enter BENVOLIO
It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
the streets,
something, make it a word and a blow.
Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,
Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
That most are busied when they're most alone,
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
[To a Servingman]  What lady is that, which doth
That's a certain text.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,
quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!
Shall I send to thee?
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
Exit
Nay, he's a flower, in faith, a very flower.
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Enter, several of both houses, who join the fray, then enter Citizens, with clubs
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:
thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Have at thee, coward!
Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
Enter BENVOLIO
if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
At what o'clock to-morrow
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
For this alliance may so happy prove,
We cannot without circumstance descry.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And that my master slew him.
This but begins the woe, others must end.
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
Arise, one knocks, good Romeo, hide thyself.
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
It strains me past the compass of my wits:
ACT V
For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,
Madam, I am not well.
sharp sauce.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
Each part, deprived of supple government,
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
'Tis well thou art not fish, if thou hadst, thou
O honey nurse, what news?
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
It is enough I may but call her mine.
Look, look! O heavy day!
Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
Nurse?
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run,
Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
They fight
The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
to dinner, thither.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
That I must love a loathed enemy.
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
You are a lover, borrow Cupid's wings,
Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids
What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
I dreamt my master and another fought,
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And but one word with one of us? couple it with
enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,
Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO
shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
As violently as hasty powder fired
Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones,--
Enter Prince, attended, MONTAGUE, CAPULET, their Wives, and others
Young Romeo is it?
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.
I speak no treason.
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
The other did not so.
Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
Come, let's away, the strangers all are gone.
By and by, I come:--
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
SCENE VI. Friar Laurence's cell.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
I have no joy of this contract to-night:
Good prudence, smatter with your gossips, go.
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
But Romeo may not: more validity,
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
With open outcry toward our monument.
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
In such a gorgeous palace!
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I'll cry a match.
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Do not swear at all,
Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
I am for you.
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Send for the county, go tell him of this:
With all the admired beauties of Verona:
Beats down their swords
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
And these, who often drown'd could never die,
By'r lady, thirty years.
Come, night, come, Romeo, come, thou day in night,
This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
If my heart's dear love--
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Either be gone before the watch be set,
should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
Ay, forsooth.
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
God in heaven bless her!
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier
With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Re-enter some of the Watch, with BALTHASAR
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
There is no world without Verona walls,
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
What, ho! apothecary!
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,
didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
No better.
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
Enter Nurse
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
my errand,
will give me occasion.
More fierce and more inexorable far
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
A glooming peace this morning with it brings,
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
I promise you, but for your company,
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.
And here is come to do some villanous shame
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
You are too hot.
So far from sounding and discovery,
Re-enter JULIET, above
Stabs herself
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
With speedy help doth lend redress.'
Is she a Capulet?
And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:
Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Exeunt
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Till holy church incorporate two in one.
PROLOGUE
My master's.
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
Exeunt
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
I will follow you.
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
For in a minute there are many days:
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
Being held a foe, he may not have access
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
By my troth, it is well said, 'for himself to mar,'
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
For so he said he would: I hear him near.
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'
ACT III
I know not, sir.
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
You shall have none ill, sir, for I'll try if they
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
Strike, drum.
O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
She, I'll swear, hath corns, am I come near ye now?
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death,'
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,
the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
And then will I be general of your woes,
Digressing from the valour of a man,
Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
I'll to him, he is hid at Laurence' cell.
And from her womb children of divers kind
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
Go hence, good night, and here stands all your state:
Go to, I say you shall.
Exit
For then she could stand alone, nay, by the rood,
Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
Get thee to bed, and rest, for thou hast need.
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them,
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
It is some meteor that the sun exhales,
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no,
letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
I do bite my thumb, sir.
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
sick health!
But Montague is bound as well as I,
We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
Why, I am glad on't, this is well: stand up:
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
How stands your disposition to be married?
love-song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?
thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
That murder'd me: I would forget it fain,
Or shall we on without a apology?
Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!
He bears him like a portly gentleman,
SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell.
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
Can heaven be so envious?
All in gore-blood, I swounded at the sight.
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
What, art thou hurt?
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
can lick their fingers.
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In penalty alike, and 'tis not hard, I think,
After the prompter, for our entrance:
O, let us hence, I stand on sudden haste.
Have you deliver'd to her our decree?
Obey, and go with me, for thou must die.
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Here's to my love!
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
So fearful were they of infection.
As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:
Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
Lies festering in his shroud, where, as they say,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And then my husband--God be with his soul!
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
Falls
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
And yet not fall, so light is vanity.
She's not fourteen.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Music plays, and they dance
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
I was your mother much upon these years
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
And makes himself an artificial night:
To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand:
Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,
Exeunt
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Well, what was yours?
Enter ABRAHAM and BALTHASAR
done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
Groan! why, no.
To know our further pleasure in this case,
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true:
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads,
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid,
And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.
This shall determine that.
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?
What say you? can you love the gentleman?
Reads
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
ay?
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Two, two, a shirt and a smock.
I take thee at thy word:
the--No, I know it begins with some other
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.
If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
not there for the goose.
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead,
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is,
mourners, and stay dinner.
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad,
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Ay, ay, the cords.
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:
Why, then is my pump well flowered.
God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
I have more care to stay than will to go:
Wisely and slow, they stumble that run fast.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
By my heel, I care not.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
O me, O me! My child, my only life,
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
And usest none in that true use indeed
Come, sir, your passado.
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his
Run to my study. By and by! God's will,
He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part,
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
SCENE II. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE I. A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
O woful time!
And yet I would it were to give again.
Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
My will to her consent is but a part,
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
Enter JULIET and Nurse
Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law,
SCENE II. Hall in Capulet's house.
Some say the lark makes sweet division,
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?
The letter was not nice but full of charge
Turn from their office to black funeral,
Can I demand.
Come, go with me.
A man, young lady! lady, such a man
What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!
true descent,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
JULIET appears above at a window
Is to himself--I will not say how true--
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
they list.
Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
[Within]  Let me come in, and you shall know
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
A rhyme I learn'd even now
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--
SCENE II. Friar Laurence's cell.
An honour! were not I thine only nurse,
In love?
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
And what to?
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
I will confess to you that I love him.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
Exeunt
These times of woe afford no time to woo.
A gentleman of noble parentage,
grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?
The hateful mansion.
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:
What's this? what's this?
Alla stoccata carries it away.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Enter CAPULET, PARIS, and Servant
I think you are happy in this second match,
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
Ye say honestly: rest you merry!
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay,
The people in the street cry Romeo,
Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I
Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
To County Paris, to prepare him up
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Spare not for the cost.
Our whole city is much bound to him.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
to the wall.
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
I have my wish.
Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help!
Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use
From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
Laying down her dagger
My lord and you were then at Mantua:--
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
Noise again
Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.
Sailing in this salt flood, the winds, thy sighs,
Enter three or four Servingmen, with spits, logs, and baskets
Give me thy hand, 'tis late: farewell, good night.
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
Shame come to Romeo!
church-door, but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
How! turn thy back and run?
Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Peter!
What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,
And she as much in love, her means much less
Driving back shadows over louring hills:
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
But He, that hath the steerage of my course,
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls,
Retires
You tallow-face!
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage,
Exeunt all but JULIET and Nurse
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
And never from this palace of dim night
Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:
Away from the light steals home my heavy son,
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.
She speaks:
Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,
Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man,
This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
I thought all for the best.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
PROLOGUE
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
Re-enter JULIET, above
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
A villain that is hither come in spite,
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
And madly play with my forefather's joints?
When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
Ready to go, but never to return.
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind,
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
Throws them down
And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,
is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire,
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Exit above
is young, and, therefore, if you should deal double
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Which you weep for.
[Within]  Madam!
No, marry, I fear thee!
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands,
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
Am I like such a fellow?
Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.
All this is comfort, wherefore weep I then?
Such as I love, and you, among the store,
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
And in this state she gallops night by night
Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
O, that she knew she were!
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE, and BENVOLIO
Will you tell me that?
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--
SCENE V. A hall in Capulet's house.
To murder, murder our solemnity?
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as
And yet no further than a wanton's bird,
But I can give thee more:
Put this in any liquid thing you will,
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
bite my thumb, sir.
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up,
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Stay, then, I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
And what love can do that dares love attempt,
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
wilt tutor me from quarrelling!
Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
'Tis now near night.
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
And fearfully did menace me with death,
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Snatching ROMEO's dagger
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
Exit
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell,
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell,
Did murder her, as that name's cursed hand
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud,
I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet
O, now I would they had changed voices too!
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
And this distilled liquor drink thou off,
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
The heads of the maids?
Enter LADY CAPULET
whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
man for coughing in the street, because he hath
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift,
Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady,
Noise within
O woful day, O woful day!
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning,
For beauty starved with her severity
Opens the tomb
To merit bliss by making me despair:
But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Good night:
That after hours with sorrow chide us not!
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,
Enter JULIET
Peace, you mumbling fool!
By holy marriage: when and where and how
Re-enter Nurse
'An if a man did need a poison now,
Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
Some comfort, nurse.
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.
Remembering how I love thy company.
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
be-rhyme her, Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gipsy,
No, madam, we have cull'd such necessaries
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
I mean, sir, in delay
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
[Aside]  Villain and he be many miles asunder.--
O true apothecary!
So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
'lady, lady, lady.'
To see, now, how a jest shall come about!
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
Exit
Why, may one ask?
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth,
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Exit, above
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Stand up, stand up, stand, and you be a man:
And stole into the covert of the wood:
Which, but their children's end, nought could remove,
That I revived, and was an emperor.
What if it be a poison, which the friar
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Ay me!
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do,
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Exit
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night,
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
No, no: but all this did I know before.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Every good hap to you that chances here:
to hear it.
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child,
I would adventure for such merchandise.
Enter CAPULET, LADY  CAPULET, Nurse, and two Servingmen
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Enter JULIET
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
JULIET wakes
Trust to't, bethink you, I'll not be forsworn.
To such a greeting: villain am I none,
My life were better ended by their hate,
Exit
'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,
And all the better is it for the maid:
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Of love?
Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Exit
Enter Nurse, to the chamber
Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
In one respect I'll thy assistant be,
When well-apparell'd April on the heel
[Aside]  I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
Farewell, commend me to thy mistress.
See, where he comes: so please you, step aside,
I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone,
Then, as the manner of our country is,
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
You will not, then?
Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
Because it is an enemy to thee,
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
To have her match'd: and having now provided
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
But my true love is grown to such excess
To Lammas-tide?
That I might touch that cheek!
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
Ay, let the county take you in your bed,
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
And the rank poison of the old will die.
I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
pray, can you read any thing you see?
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and PARIS
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
But send him back.
Faith, here it is.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.
Here in this city visiting the sick,
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
I married them, and their stol'n marriage-day
Romeo will answer it.
Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
SCENE III. A churchyard, in it a tomb belonging to the Capulets.
Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
But a hare that is hoar
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE
Why I descend into this bed of death,
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!
They are but beggars that can count their worth,
I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which added
They fight
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.
Quarrel sir! no, sir.
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
For your broken shin.
What noise is here?
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
That is, because the traitor murderer lives.
Of disobedient opposition
In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
And gave him what becomed love I might,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Madam, if you could find out but a man
One of our order, to associate me,
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
their books,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
But for the sunset of my brother's son
I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.
One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
No.
Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!
Hold thy desperate hand:
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Nurse!
It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
True, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
It doth so, holy sir, and there's my master,
No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.
On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
Inherit at my house, hear all, all see,
This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Out on her, hilding!
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
was hurt under your arm.
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave,
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
A sail, a sail!
Bear hence this body and attend our will:
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie,
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
But now I see this one is one too much,
to comfort me.
More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Exit
'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
Many for many virtues excellent,
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!
But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
Upon his body that slaughter'd him!
Are made already mothers: by my count,
Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'
Is death to any he that utters them.
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
good quarrel, and the law on my side.
Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief,
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
By my head, here come the Capulets.
And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen,
Shall have the chinks.
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
Here's Romeo's man, we found him in the churchyard.
This is she--
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:
Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend,
Exit
Enter PARIS, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
They fight
And where the worser is predominant,
Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,
But 'tis no wit to go.
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
To make die with a restorative.
For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,
How long is't now since last yourself and I
The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,
Romeo!
For what, I pray thee?
So thrive my soul--
As daylight doth a lamp, her eyes in heaven
You lie.
O, what more favour can I do to thee,
Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
But old folks, many feign as they were dead,
Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise,
And then down falls again.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
I dare no longer stay.
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Enter CAPULET
But to himself so secret and so close,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
fantasticoes, these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:
Do you quarrel, sir?
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
I will give you the minstrel.
Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze,
Give me my Romeo, and, when he shall die,
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Farewell, be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:
SCENE V. Capulet's orchard.
Not so big as a round little worm
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Falls on ROMEO's body, and dies
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push
person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time.
to the wall.
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
May not one speak?
And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,
Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell.
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
I drew to part them: in the instant came
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to,
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
And leave him all, life, living, all is Death's.
And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Enter MONTAGUE and others
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
Enter FRIAR JOHN
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
Immediately we do exile him hence:
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death,
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,
Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
Which craves as desperate an execution.
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
More honourable state, more courtship lives
No faith, no honesty in men, all perjured,
Jacks, and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Singing
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
Make haste, make haste.
That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Enter ROMEO
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
She could have run and waddled all about,
yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
Were of an age: well, Susan is with God,
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'
Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her,
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears,
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
[Aside]  For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:
Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Should in the furthest east begin to draw
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
Enter ROMEO
me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
That all the world will be in love with night
Is too much for a score,
Good morrow, father.
Thou mayst prove false, at lovers' perjuries
Not in a grave,
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
It rains downright.
Enter Nurse and PETER
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes,
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
SCENE I. Friar Laurence's cell.
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he, though his
And I'll believe thee.
fingers goes not with me.
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
Enter ROMEO
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled:
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting, it is a most
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Exeunt
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
A lightning before death: O, how may I
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
And since that time it is eleven years,
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO
For it was bad enough before their spite.
O, in this love, you love your child so ill,
Exeunt
You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play.
Of honourable reckoning are you both,
God Pardon him! I do, with all my heart,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
And world's exile is death: then banished,
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips,
I know not.
Tush, thou art deceived:
What said my man, when my betossed soul
For fair without the fair within to hide:
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw.
What?
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
Exeunt
Away, begone, the sport is at the best.
Going to find a bare-foot brother out
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
Retires
Enter ROMEO
Of one I danced withal.
me like men:
A greater power than we can contradict
Stay, fellow, I can read.
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Madam!
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
I pray thee, leave me to my self to-night,
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
So please you, let me now be left alone,
I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
Ay, nurse, what of that? both with an R.
Ay, a thousand times.
Not proud, you have, but thankful, that you have:
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.
dial is now upon the prick of noon.
Now must I to the monument alone,
Her eye discourses, I will answer it.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
To press before thy father to a grave?
Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.
For even the day before, she broke her brow:
Have you importuned him by any means?
Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Romeo is coming.
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
They fight
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
I dream'd a dream to-night.
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
And but thou love me, let them find me here:
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
How long hath he been there?
Away with the joint-stools, remove the
Being black put us in mind they hide the fair,
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled,
Go, I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
I thank you, honest gentlemen, good night.
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous
A lover may bestride the gossamer
Where is your mother?'
Exit
What a pestilent knave is this same!
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
And joy comes well in such a needy time:
Dost thou not laugh?
The more I have, for both are infinite.
Forgetting any other home but this.
Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
That idles in the wanton summer air,
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
O God, she comes!
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.
Enter ROMEO and JULIET above, at the window
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
I'll not endure him.
Let us take the law of our sides, let them begin.
Nay, that's not so.
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer
A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone,
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,
I come from Lady Juliet.
SCENE I. Verona. A public place.
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
Herself poised with herself in either eye:
wisely, wisely.
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your
Be not her maid, since she is envious,
Myself condemned and myself excused.
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.
What's there?
O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
I wake before the time that Romeo
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
And soundly too: your houses!
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you,
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
The date is out of such prolixity:
But sadly tell me who.
With thy black mantle, till strange love, grown bold,
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Speakest thou from thy heart?
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
Enter CAPULET
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Doth she not think me an old murderer,
All this I know, and to the marriage
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower,
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
And all things change them to the contrary.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
None but for some and yet all different.
assembly: whither should they come?
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
Till she had laid it and conjured it down,
What villain madam?
My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead,
your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,
In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose.
Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
To supper, to our house.
To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
In my behalf, my reputation stain'd
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Or else beshrew them both.
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,
To rid her from this second marriage,
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
sweet sorrow,
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
To this same place, to this same monument.
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:
O any thing, of nothing first create!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind prince,
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life,
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
I do defy thy conjurations,
Amen!
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
For I will raise her statue in pure gold,
Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone,
Graze where you will you shall not house with me:
uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters, my fair niece
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy,
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
Sings
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
And I am proof against their enmity.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
Good night, good night! parting is such
Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear,
Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:
These violent delights have violent ends
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
dares, being dared.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
Then I will give you the serving-creature.
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Examine other beauties.
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires,
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Drinks
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
As Phaethon would whip you to the west,
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
Happily met, my lady and my wife!
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
True, I talk of dreams,
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
We shall be short in our provision:
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes!
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,
Ay, so I fear, the more is my unrest.
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
For this night's watching.
The unreasonable fury of a beast:
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
because musicians have no gold for sounding:
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Out upon you! what a man are you!
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
writ, and can never find what names the writing
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie,
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove,'
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
An you re us and fa us, you note us.
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
My dear?
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
Mass, and well said, a merry whoreson, ha!
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.
Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time
O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
I am the greatest, able to do least,
O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?
And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
What wouldst thou have with me?
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,
His son is thirty.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
What further woe conspires against mine age?
That thou her maid art far more fair than she:
Sojourn in Mantua, I'll find out your man,
Fear me not.
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.
make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
Like softest music to attending ears!
maids, and cut off their heads.
soon moody to be moved.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
Here comes your father, tell him so yourself,
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must
Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters, the lady
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Exit
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in
I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when
Exit, above
And turns it to exile, there art thou happy:
I am too young, I pray you, pardon me.'
Advances
Enter JULIET
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
Pink for flower.
nieces, Mercutio and his brother Valentine, mine
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch, marry, 'tis enough.
Both by myself and many other friends:
Romeo! my cousin Romeo!
And bad'st me bury love.
Exeunt CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, PARIS, and FRIAR LAURENCE
But, soft! what day is this?
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Up.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
Warm and new kill'd.
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
What is her mother?
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
Laying PARIS in the tomb
SCENE IV. A street.
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in,
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
In all her best array bear her to church:
By a name
O lamentable day!
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?
A great suspicion: stay the friar too.
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS, with Musicians
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?
Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
We took this mattock and this spade from him,
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
At my poor house look to behold this night
The traces of the smallest spider's web,
By giving liberty unto thine eyes,
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
A most courteous exposition.
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,
And by and by my master drew on him,
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
ACT IV
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
ACT II
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Is the day so young?
the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,
There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,
Enter ROMEO
Enter LADY CAPULET
I departed not and left him there.
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
I'll fa you, do you note me?
'Then music with her silver sound
With Cupid's arrow, she hath Dian's wit,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
They must take it in sense that feel it.
I do beseech thee--
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
A torch for me: let wantons light of heart
This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
Take all myself.
And then in post he came from Mantua
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
Yes, better, sir.
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man,
It is supposed, the fair creature died,
Exeunt
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
She's not well married that lives married long,
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
Anon, anon!
Go with me to the vault.
Nurse calls within
Exeunt
Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.
Of all my buried ancestors are packed:
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
To Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.
Enough of this, I pray thee, hold thy peace.
hence to wait, I beseech you, follow straight.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
'Tis the way
[Aside]  Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Enter the PRINCE and Attendants
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Or never after look me in the face:
Came he not home to-night?
SCENE II. Capulet's orchard.
And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--
but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
In what I further shall intend to do,
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
Why 'Heart's ease?'
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
kitchen-wench, marry, she had a better love to
shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
Why, such is love's transgression.
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith,
Good night.
She was too good for me: but, as I said,
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
I have.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
constrains a man to bow in the hams.
I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
Enter MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor,
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Up, sir, go with me,
What hast thou found?
Exit Servant
That last is true, the sweeter rest was mine.
To make confession and to be absolved.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Music within
Find them out whose names are written here! It is
white wench's black eye, shot through the ear with a
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Why, what is Tybalt?
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
all men's, and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Enter CAPULET and Nurse
On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
That were some spite: my invocation
Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
O cousin, cousin!
My love as deep, the more I give to thee,
No money, on my faith, but the gleek,
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things,
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Out--
Raise up the Montagues: some others search:
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall,
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
Comes forward
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
How now! who calls?
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
I would I were thy bird.
To an impatient child that hath new robes
Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?
What simpleness is this! I come, I come!
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
That we have had no time to move our daughter:
Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,
In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
Enter Nurse and PETER
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
Enter JULIET
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
That almost freezes up the heat of life:
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
An she agree, within her scope of choice
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
mar.
Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Where is my mother! why, she is within,
Which she hath praised him with above compare
Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs,
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Exit
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
But Romeo may not, he is banished:
Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
Which the commission of thy years and art
The which if you with patient ears attend,
Enter JULIET
Peter!
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
And that we have a curse in having her:
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
No matter: get thee gone,
Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper,
This letter he early bid me give his father,
By their own beauties, or, if love be blind,
I do protest, I never injured thee,
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
I will omit no opportunity
No, for then we should be colliers.
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?
Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
And in the taste confounds the appetite:
The what?
Exit PETER
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Shalt with him hence.
Exit
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,
Romeo!
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
you.
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
[To JULIET]  If I profane with my unworthiest hand
Is empty on the back of Montague,--
inch narrow to an ell broad!
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
And drink it off, and, if you had the strength
Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
And know their spring, their head, their
Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead, stabbed with a
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
To Servant, giving a paper
It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.
A thousand times good night!
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
I dare not, sir
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
Go, you cot-quean, go,
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
Of ill-shaped fishes, and about his shelves
'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
I will then give it you soundly.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO
A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,
Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
Give me my sin again.
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
Re-enter others of the Watch, with FRIAR LAURENCE
eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Give me a case to put my visage in:
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Exit FRIAR LAURENCE
But new struck nine.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Right.
And therefore have I little talk'd of love,
And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.
He is wise,
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone,
Is very good meat in lent
I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
Thursday is near, lay hand on heart, advise:
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
A parlous knock, and it cried bitterly:
Call, good Mercutio.
Monday, my lord,
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo, now art
Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty,
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
Look, and thou shalt see.
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses,
is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak, good, good nurse, speak.
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
No less! nay, bigger, women grow by men.
An I might live to see thee married once,
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized,
And, to sink in it, should you burden love,
Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me,
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
encounter Tybalt?
The world affords no law to make thee rich,
The day is broke, be wary, look about.
No, my good lord.
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,
'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not,'
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
For I have need of many orisons
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys, be
me a piece of marchpane, and, as thou lovest me, let
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and others
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
Come, Montague, for thou art early up,
O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer: I will say
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,
That God had lent us but this only child,
But saying o'er what I have said before:
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
No truly sir, not a penny.
Farewell, dear father!
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
Come, vial.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
As is the night before some festival
Depart again: here, here will I remain
I would the fool were married to her grave!
This is the place, there, where the torch doth burn.
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
SCENE V. Juliet's chamber.
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
For you and I are past our dancing days:
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:
[Within]  Lead, boy: which way?
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
One that you love.
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
One calls within 'Juliet.'
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff,
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
It is an honour that I dream not of.
Drawing
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we mask'd.
How oft when men are at the point of death
Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.
Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
It burneth in the Capel's monument.
Who is it?
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio,
At the hour of nine.
When presently through all thy veins shall run
I'll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
That copest with death himself to scape from it:
Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were,
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
That he should hither come as this dire night,
And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
very first house, of the first and second cause:
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
Hath had no notice of these accidents,
O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Well, think of marriage now, younger than you,
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!
The County Paris hath set up his rest,
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give,
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:
Madam, I am here.
What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,
Good Peter, to hide her face, for her fan's the
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Your mother.
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground,
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,
And for that offence
Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.
Of healths five-fathom deep, and then anon
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
for I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
What will you give us?
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:
proportion, rests me his minim rest, one, two, and
When it hoars ere it be spent.
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
Hie you to church, I must another way,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
A visor for a visor! what care I
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two,
Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS
button, a duellist, a duellist, a gentleman of the
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
Now, fellow,
ways, wench, serve God. What, have you dined at home?
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune,
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
How is't, my soul? let's talk, it is not day.
Enter PETER
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog
I charge thee in the princes name, obey.
arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
Was ever book containing such vile matter
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come,
Go thither, and, with unattainted eye,
his pencil, and the painter with his nets, but I am
Marry, I will, and this is wisely done.
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
Romeo, away, be gone!
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
to think!--
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
Farewell!
Which mannerly devotion shows in this,
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
was I with you there for the goose?
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Vincetino come of Bentivolii.
Beats BIONDELLO
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in
With all my heart. This fellow I remember,
Why, thou say'st true, it is a paltry cap,
And I seeing this came thence for very shame,
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.
Come on, I say, and first begin with her.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight,
Will he woo her? ay, or I'll hang her.
There's fire ready, and therefore, good Grumio, the news.
For it engenders choler, planteth anger,
As he forth walked on his way:--
A man well known throughout all Italy.
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned
To pardon me yet for a night or two,
you first,
Nay, then you lie: it is the blessed sun.
Such duty to the drunkard let him do
Am I a lord? and have I such a lady?
It is: may it be done?
Exit
She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat,
This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, wither'd,
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
Wilt thou have music? hark! Apollo plays,
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
What, in the midst of the street?
Ay, there's the villany.
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
That will be never: tune your instrument.
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool
knowest, winter tames man, woman and beast, for it
words plain, 'Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here,
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you,
Art thou his father?
Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.
O sir, I do, and will repute you ever
To give you over at this first encounter,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.
Never to marry with her though she would entreat:
I wis it is not half way to her heart,
For me as for you?
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
To see her noble lord restored to health,
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand.
Tell thou the tale: but hadst thou not crossed me,
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed
A mighty man of Pisa, by report
if this be not a lawful case for me to leave his
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
How now! what's the matter?
To change true rules for old inventions.
I do assure thee, father, so it is.
hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
A bridegroom say you? 'tis a groom indeed,
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy:
It shall be what o'clock I say it is.
She will not.
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!
is the right Vincentio.
ACT IV
Re-enter PETRUCHIO
I like it well: good Grumio, fetch it me.
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
Mistake no more: I am not Licio,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without,
and let the world slip: we shall ne'er be younger.
No, not a denier. Go by, Jeronimy: go to thy cold
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
Exit
O, no, good Kate, neither art thou the worse
And, Will you, nill you, I will marry you.
accept his service.
thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good
Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
honest witnesses: If this be not that you look for,
may I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
Her affability and bashful modesty,
kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red
Now, go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.
Then give me leave to have prerogative,
'Tis well, and hold your own, in any case,
And practise rhetoric in your common talk,
Your worship is deceived, the gown is made
maintained all by helping Baptista's eldest daughter
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
To strive for that which resteth in my choice:
A velvet dish: fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy:
Lay forth the gown.
You lie, in faith, for you are call'd plain Kate,
Know, sir, that I am call'd Hortensio.
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.
Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
I pray thee, moralize them.
Whom thou lovest best: see thou dissemble not.
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
Hark, Petruchio, she says she'll see thee
That triumph thus upon my misery!
Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of:
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green,
What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook?
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
Call you me daughter? now, I promise you
Go take it hence, be gone, and say no more.
What you will have it named, even that it is,
I will be angry: what hast thou to do?
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither:
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?
SCENE I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTA'S house.
I will attend her here,
Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence,
Enter BIONDELLO
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap:
'Sigeia tellus,' disguised thus to get your love,
well knock'd at first, Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
No cock of mine, you crow too like a craven.
I'll in to counsel them, haply my presence
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise,
It was the friar of orders grey,
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
To seek their fortunes farther than at home
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear:
listening. Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
If either of you both love Katharina,
Let me entreat you.
And couple Clowder with the deep--mouth'd brach.
and weighty.
Exeunt PETRUCHIO and GRUMIO
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all:
I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the
Not possible, for who shall bear your part,
And unsuspected court her by herself.
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Than hath been taught by any of my trade:
And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely:
A match! 'tis done.
There is, there is.
Enter LUCENTIO, HORTENSIO, and BIANCA
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
SCENE II. A bedchamber in the Lord's house.
him soundly, sir: well, was it fit for a servant to
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
Exeunt Servants
Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds:
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
But did I never speak of all that time?
Peter, didst ever see the like?
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
Hark you, sir: I'll have them very fairly bound:
But who comes here?
Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
Pisa renown'd for grave citizens
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
Thy gown? why, ay: come, tailor, let us see't.
sleekly combed their blue coats brushed and their
That all is done in reverend care of her,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son,
With oath kept waking and with brawling fed:
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me
And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
That, were my state far worser than it is,
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Take him up gently and to bed with him,
There is a lord will hear you play to-night:
And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell
Whither away, or where is thy abode?
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
Exit one with the Players
Even such a woman oweth to her husband,
The quaint musician, amorous Licio,
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Thy beauty, that doth make me like thee well,
Master, your love must live a maid at home,
How fares my noble lord?
'Tis, marvel, but that you are but newly come,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
O, that a mighty man of such descent,
Master, for my hand,
My lessons make no music in three parts.
You bid me make it orderly and well,
And so she shall, Lucentio shall make one,
And watch withal, for, but I be deceived,
Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.
Signior Baptista may remember me,
No shame but mine: I must, forsooth, be forced
Enter BAPTISTA
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare,
That shake not, though they blow perpetually.
O, yes, my lord, but very idle words:
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
The moon! the sun: it is not moonlight now.
A pretty peat! it is best
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
every morning.
Exit BIONDELLO
Before I have a husband for the elder:
GREMIO discovered. Enter behind BIONDELLO, LUCENTIO, and BIANCA
O, this is it that makes your servants droop!
And that his lady mourns at his disease:
My lord, 'tis but begun.
Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment
I will not go to-day, and ere I do,
An affable and courteous gentleman:
I know her father, though I know not her,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom
Say 'What is it your honour will command?'
Such a mad marriage never was before:
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
Take in your love, and then let me alone.
her face and so disfigure her with it that she
To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
by law: I'll not budge an inch, boy: let him come,
this controversy.
Simois,' I know you not, 'hic est Sigeia tellus,' I
A hundred then.
Exit KATHARINA
If he be credulous and trust my tale,
And yet not many.
And, for that dowry, I'll assure her of
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret,
Say thou wilt walk, we will bestrew the ground:
According to the fashion and the time.
We'll show thee Io as she was a maid,
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep
What's that to thee?
Talk not, Signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.
That is, not bestow my youngest daughter
But I have cause to pry into this pedant:
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warm'd with ale,
And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent:
Spoke like an officer, ha' to thee, lad!
Right son to the right Vincentio,
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
Enter BAPTISTA and LUCENTIO
Exit BIANCA
That covenants may be kept on either hand.
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health,
That with your strange encounter much amazed me,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!
Good Kate, I am a gentleman.
[Reads]  'With a trunk sleeve:'
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
Tell me her father's name and 'tis enough,
Exeunt all but PETRUCHIO
than legs, nor no more shoes than feet, nay,
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
Have leave and leisure to make love to her
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
in the chine, troubled with the lampass, infected
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
And with the clamour keep her still awake.
I chafe you, if I tarry: let me go.
For yet his honour never heard a play--
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
My men should call me 'lord:' I am your goodman.
mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.
Right true it is, your son Lucentio here
God save you, gentlemen!
'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you:
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman:
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house:
Is this your speeding? nay, then, good night our part!
Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd.
lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory,
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
[Aside]  I see she's like to have neither cap nor gown.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
Where small experience grows. But in a few,
The younges t daughter whom you hearken for
Sir, sir, the first's for me, let her go by.
Am I not wise?
She is your own, else, you must pardon me,
Exit
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
For so your father charged me at our parting,
You're welcome, sir, and he, for your good sake.
I must and will have Katharina to my wife.
I promised to inquire carefully
Good masters, take it not unkindly, pray,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Enter GRUMIO
Ay, marry, am I, sir, and now 'tis plotted.
His name is Licio, born in Mantua.
Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly:
With scarfs and fans and double change of bravery,
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.
Strikes him
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
bed, and warm thee.
A piece of ice: if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch
Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHARINA
Come, you are so full of cony-catching!
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread,
And think it not the worst of an your fortunes
Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, HORTENSIO, and Servants
of boots that have been candle-cases, one buckled,
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
Re-enter HORTENSIO, with his head broke
This liberty is all that I request,
Her dowery wealthy, and of worthy birth,
you think is his name?
Why, a horse.
Not in my house, Lucentio, for, you know,
'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone,
The patroness of heavenly harmony:
Enter the Page as a lady, with attendants
shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.
The base is right, 'tis the base knave that jars.
Happier the man, whom favourable stars
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
Dine with my father, drink a health to me,
Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio,
need none, so long as I live.
Supposing it a thing impossible,
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
Lucentio is your name, of whence, I pray?
Valance of Venice gold in needlework,
expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
This virtue and this moral discipline,
For curious I cannot be with you,
Exit
And now by law, as well as reverend age,
him up ever since he was three years old, and his
If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it.
Exeunt BIONDELLO, TRANIO, and Pedant, as fast as may be
And ask him what apparel he will wear,
Sir, you say well and well you do conceive,
How! she is busy and she cannot come!
I say she shall: and first begin with her.
Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes.
often burst and now repaired with knots, one girth
It were impossible I should speed amiss.
That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
And that his bags shall prove.
A pair of stocks, you rogue!
There was no link to colour Peter's hat,
Myself am struck in years, I must confess,
A merchant of incomparable wealth.
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee:
Where is he?
Go, hop me over every kennel home,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures:
With gentle conference, soft and affable.
Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard
You may go to the devil's dam: your gifts are so
[Aside]  Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
Exeunt BIANCA, KATHARINA, and Widow
Petruchio is my name, Antonio's son,
I think she'll sooner prove a soldier
We thank your honour.
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
In music, instruments and poetry,
I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
He is my father, sir, and, sooth to say,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
Thou'rt a tall fellow: hold thee that to drink.
No worse than I, upon some agreement
Come, Kate, sit down, I know you have a stomach.
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
town-armory, with a broken hilt, and chapeless,
Do me this right, hear me with patience.
Come, go along, and see the truth hereof,
And, as he stoop'd again to take it up,
Biondello, what of that?
gown for thy master's use!
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
An eye-sore to our solemn festival!
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
Were it not that my fellow-school-master
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?
Yours, if you talk of tails: and so farewell.
Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
And speak I will, I am no child, no babe:
Petruchio, patience, I am Grumio's pledge:
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Be patient, gentlemen, I choose her for myself:
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord:
That will I.
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
And so am come abroad to see the world.
That talk'd of her, have talk'd amiss of her:
That take it on you at the first so roundly.
Yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
Or else you like not of my company.
What?
Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.
Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or
Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
I pray you, let it stand.
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
Adieu, good neighbour.
And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.
The match is made, and all is done:
My banquet is to close our stomachs up,
That at the parting all the church did echo:
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst,
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?
Ay, that Petruchio came.
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing:
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me,
together, and fast it fairly out: our cakes dough on
Mi perdonato, gentle master mine,
Content.
Exit Servant, with LUCENTIO and HORTENSIO, BIONDELLO following
that hath been long studying at Rheims, as cunning
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior:
I hope better.
Presenting HORTENSIO
What is she but a foul contending rebel
You that durst swear at your mistress Bianca
Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl,
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
While she did call me rascal fiddler
That stops my way in Padua. Grumio,
Well said, master, mum! and gaze your fill.
What, Grumio!
Exit
Which I could fancy more than any other.
How say you, Signior Gremio?
Content. What is the wager?
thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown, but I did
Bid them come near.
despite of the flesh and the blood.
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom,
as two and fifty horses: why, nothing comes amiss,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
When will he be here?
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity:
I know she is an irksome brawling scold:
It may not be.
on no water.
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
wish him to her father.
Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.
Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
She was, good Curtis, before this frost: but, thou
Knock you here, sir! why, sir, what am I, sir, that
How now! what news?
the carpets laid, and every thing in order?
before to make a fire, and they are coming after to
Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
No, say'st me so, friend? What countryman?
And I'll not wish thee to her.
Re-enter BIONDELLO
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
May show her duty and make known her love?'
I'll have no halves, I'll bear it all myself.
But love, fair looks and true obedience,
Exeunt
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
Here comes the rogue.
I have forgot your name, but, sure, that part
Why, how now, daughter Katharina! in your dumps?
The younger then is free and not before.
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat,
Exeunt GREMIO and HORTENSIO
Ay, and a kind one too:
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Away! I say, commend me to thy master.
Pardon, dear father.
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale:
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
Born in Verona, old Antonio's son:
she may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so:
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid,
Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?
But thine doth fry.
Fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
They call me Katharina that do talk of me.
'E la mi,' show pity, or I die.'
Why, is it not news, to hear of Petruchio's coming?
Exit
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
To whom my father is not all unknown,
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange!
Yet you are wither'd.
Enter TRANIO and HORTENSIO
Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.
I am to get a man,--whate'er he be,
To painful labour both by sea and land,
master Vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.
And say 'What is't your honour will command,
As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.
And in possession twenty thousand crowns.
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
How tame, when men and women are alone,
Here, madam:
How now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale?
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
On them to took and practise by myself.
Petruchio, stand by a while.
And venture madly on a desperate mart.
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
I am for thee straight: take thou the
Must get a father, call'd 'supposed Vincentio,'
[Reads]  'Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown:'
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence:
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
Enter KATHARINA and BIANCA
Dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee straight
Face not me: thou hast braved many men, brave not
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may:
There, There, Hortensio, will you any wife?
I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
And now I find report a very liar,
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
And he whose wife is most obedient
Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
Mates, maid! how mean you that? no mates for you,
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
I'll leave her houses three or four as good,
And for thy maintenance commits his body
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
What, household stuff?
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife,
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady:
Have to my widow! and if she be froward,
And, for the good report I hear of you
It will be pastime passing excellent,
I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
I found the effect of love in idleness:
As one unworthy all the former favours
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here:
Mistress, what cheer?
Grumio, my horse.
And so it is: I wonder what it bodes.
Why, sir, he comes not.
and all one.
see where he looks out of the window.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves:
Exeunt
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you,
I thank thee: thou shalt not lose by it.
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
not--Cock's passion, silence! I hear my master.
Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
It skills not much. we'll fit him to our turn,--
'Tis very true: thou didst it excellent.
And let Bianca take her sister's room.
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
Or Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,
That till the father rid his hands of her,
O, how we joy to see your wit restored!
Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
But sup them well and look unto them all:
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
Enter BAPTISTA, KATHARINA, BIANCA, GREMIO, and HORTENSIO. LUCENTIO and TRANIO stand by
And, to be noted for a merry man,
And what of all this?
in music and mathematics: his name is Cambio, pray,
you give me any conserves, give me conserves of
Which never were nor no man ever saw.
Exit
But where is Kate? where is my lovely bride?
Hush, master! here's some good pastime toward:
Worse and worse, she will not come! O vile,
That I am dog-weary: but at last I spied
Katharina, that cap of yours becomes you not:
That by degrees we mean to look into,
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Knocks
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk,
Enter BIONDELLO
You shall have me assisting you in all.
'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion,
this condition, to be whipped at the high cross
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
both sides. Farewell: yet for the love I bear my
[Aside]  That will not be in haste.
This, by the way, I let you understand,
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
a puppet of her.
And, as the jest did glance away from me,
Sorry am I that our good will effects
You may go walk, and give me leave a while:
Brother Petruchio, sister Katharina,
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
hang'd first.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince
To my daughters, and tell them both,
command at all hours.
So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, I pray.
And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
Go on, and fetch our horses back again.
We could at once put us in readiness,
footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
Master, master, look about you: who goes there, ha?
which hath two letters for her name fairly set down
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livest!
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
Make it no wonder, if you knew my business,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please:
call ladies.
To bandy word for word and frown for frown,
Gave me my being and my father first,
Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
You understand me, sir: so shall you stay
Where left we last?
'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.
counterfeit assurance: take you assurance of her,
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
And, to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy?
A horse and a man
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
Will I apply that treats of happiness
And not till then.
That offer service to your lordship.
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
A very mean meaning.
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly
You are welcome all.
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair
You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves!
Enter LUCENTIO and his man TRANIO
Why, that is nothing: for I tell you, father,
with their left legs and not presume to touch a hair
Good morrow, gentle mistress: where away?
I know not what to say: but give me your hands,
So honour peereth in the meanest habit.
Let's hear. O fie! the treble jars.
And therefore 'tis called a sensible tale: and this
And well we may come there by dinner-time.
I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let's away.
Exeunt
Ay.
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's go.
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
When I should bid good morrow to my bride,
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
Do get their children, but in this case of wooing,
If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
Are you content to stay?
be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring.
with two broken points: his horse hipped with an
Marry, and did, but if you be remember'd,
Or, if not so, until the sun be set:
Go, girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
Where is the life that late I led--
From Florence and must here deliver them.
She will not come: she bids you come to her.
'Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor
I know her answer.
His youngest daughter, beautiful Binaca,
And through the instrument my pate made way,
trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the
Go, call my men, and let us straight to him,
What sayest thou, Biondello?
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove,
No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two,
bear-herd, and now by present profession a tinker?
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured:
my father is here look'd for every day,
He cried upon it at the merest loss
Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio?
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
Amen, say we: we will be witnesses.
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury:
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
Swear, if thou darest.
If you should smile he grows impatient.
For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Why, here's no crab, and therefore look not sour.
Right, I mean you.
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him
A merchant of great traffic through the world,
beguile the old pantaloon.
Master, you look'd so longly on the maid,
Peace, sirrah!
Enter Players
And revel it as bravely as the best,
That, being a stranger in this city here,
[Aside]  As much as an apple doth an oyster,
fancies' pricked in't for a feather: a monster, a
And twangling Jack, with twenty such vile terms,
But say, what to thine old news?
Tranio, you jest: but have you both forsworn me?
The worst is this, that, at so slender warning,
And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me:
I will be very kind, and liberal
An ancient angel coming down the hill,
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself:
Why, that's all one.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
Why, 'Jack, boy! ho! boy!' and as much news as
Strikes him
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house:
What's this? mutton?
Enter TRANIO, and the Pedant dressed like VINCENTIO
this quarrel.
like the horse, with a linen stock on one leg and a
Exeunt all but HORTENSIO
Who comes with him?
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou!
Mistake me not, I speak but as I find.
So well I know my duty to my elders.
miry a place, how she was bemoiled, how he left her
But did you not request to have it cut?
Presenting LUCENTIO
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoy'd
Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
I will be master of what is mine own:
And all things answerable to this portion.
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
And do as adversaries do in law,
fellows in the world, an a man could light on them,
That she shall have, besides an argosy
I, sir! ne'er a whit.
Enter KATHARINA and GRUMIO
She shall not.
If it would please him come and marry her!'
And here I take the unfeigned oath,
but my head and my neck. A fire good Curtis.
Away, away, mad ass! his name is Lucentio and he is
'Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato,' may I say.
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet:
What then?
Exeunt
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old
Nor can we lie distinguish'd by our faces
Well aim'd of such a young one.
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
And see you read no other lectures to her:
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings
O, how I long to have some chat with her!
And free access and favour as the rest:
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich,
SCENE I. Padua. A public place.
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say:
Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body
For such a one as leaves a gentleman,
stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in
As shall with either part's agreement stand?
You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.
But one that scorn to live in this disguise,
Exit a Servingman
Or ere I journey to your father's house.
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua,
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale,
Enter BIONDELLO
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.
Even he, Biondello.
Flies after BIANCA
Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista,
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
Enter a Pedant
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo
I cannot tell, I fear 'tis choleric.
I care not.
And could not get him for my heart to do it.
To-morrow I intend to hunt again.
mio Petruchio.' Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound
Tush, Gremio, though it pass your patience and mine
And offer me disguised in sober robes
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure,
He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
They retire
Exit
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
Then thus. Baptista is safe, talking with the
Me shall you find ready and willing
Exeunt
Why, sir, what's your conceit in that?
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
But will you woo this wild-cat?
The taming-school! what, is there such a place?
Here's Lucentio,
Who? that Petruchio came?
It likes me well. Biondello, hie you home,
After his studies or his usual pain?
Of love between your daughter and himself:
rebused your worship?
When I shall ask the banns and when be married.
What say you to a neat's foot?
Exit
And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
I know you think to dine with me to-day,
And, honest company, I thank you all,
As I wish you were.
O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies!
Re-enter Pedant below, TRANIO, BAPTISTA, and Servants
We have not yet been seen in any house,
I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and
Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe,
What Tranio did, myself enforced him to,
Enter KATHARINA
You logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms!
her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool
tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my
comondy a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
Look not pale, Bianca, thy father will not frown.
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy,
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner:
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.
though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
Belike, some noble gentleman that means,
And by my father's love and leave am arm'd
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell for
Theretake it to you, trenchers, cups, and all,
And, toward the education of your daughters,
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
His name! as if I knew not his name: I have brought
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have
Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.
serving-men in their new fustian, their white
A dish that I do love to feed upon.
Enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, TRANIO, KATHARINA, BIANCA, LUCENTIO, and others, attendants
So I to her and so she yields to me,
And I expressly am forbid to touch it,
Throws the meat,  and c. about the stage
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
You shall go see your pupils presently.
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry,
[Reads]  'The sleeves curiously cut.'
Re-enter BIONDELLO
May well abate the over-merry spleen
her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt
But stay a while: what company is this?
forswear him, or else we are all undone.
man so rayed? was ever man so weary? I am sent
Why came I hither but to that intent?
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies:
All books of love, see that at any hand,
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
I fly, Biondello: but they may chance to need thee
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged:
Or what you will command me will I do,
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
That she shall still be curst in company.
I promised we would be contributors
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca:
I have.
I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
Fellow Grumio!
A' has a little gall'd me, I confess,
Go in, Bianca:
If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby
with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with
So please your lordship to accept our duty.
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
He does it under name of perfect love,
I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Villain, not for thy life: take up my mistress'
apples. But come, since this bar in law makes us
Falls asleep
Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray,
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
Make feasts, invite friends, and proclaim the banns,
If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so,
I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
Signior Baptista's liberality,
Knock at the gate! O heavens! Spake you not these
Which runs himself and catches for his master.
I'll after him, and see the event of this.
To save your life in this extremity,
Cunning in music and the mathematics,
Strikes him
a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
Few words suffice, and therefore, if thou know
And I am one that love Bianca more
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she
His name and credit shall you undertake,
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
As lively painted as the deed was done.
You peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
to be married to hell?
SCENE II. Padua. LUCENTIO'S house.
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en:
But sun it is not, when you say it is not,
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
What, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
It cannot be.
Thus I conceive by him.
Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse,
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
Then never trust me, if I be afeard.
me, I will neither be faced nor braved. I say unto
But so is not she.
his rope-tricks. I'll tell you what sir, an she
Grumio gave order how it should be done.
restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst:
As hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels.
house of her! Come on.
bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.
I know it is the moon.
Her name is Katharina Minola,
You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me leave.
SCENE I. Before an alehouse on a heath.
Madam, undress you and come now to bed.
Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
And very rich: but thou'rt too much my friend,
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress,
Why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
The patron of my life and liberty.
Enter PETRUCHIO and KATHARINA
Have I not heard the sea puff'd up with winds
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
bestraught: here's--
Enter CURTIS
What's that, I pray?
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
He says so, Tranio.
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.
feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office?
Nay, faith, I'll see the church o' your back, and
For this reason, if you'll know,
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid
Faith, nothing, but has left me here behind, to
Nay, I dare not swear it.
Come, mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu,
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic,
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.
thy master's father, Vincentio?
Her sister Katharina welcomed you withal?
What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see
At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault?
And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
To learn the order of my fingering,
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
Methinks he looks as though he were in love:
While he did bear my countenance in the town,
And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure
First, know, my horse is tired, my master and
Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and
Aside
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day:
Exeunt
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
In her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her,
Signior Petruchio, fie! you are to blame.
You are i' the right, sir: 'tis for my mistress.
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What,
looking out at the window.
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
Gentlemen, content ye, I am resolved:
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Hortensio, hark:
I will in, to be revenged for this villany.
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I
Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee,
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly
But then up farther, and as for as Rome,
so long am I at the least. But wilt thou make a
So had you need.
the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom
But, sir, here comes your boy,
thyself execute, to make one among these wooers: if
so money comes withal.
Come, come, you wasp, i' faith, you are too angry.
Till Katharina the curst have got a husband.
knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?
I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
Say thou wilt course, thy greyhounds are as swift
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Master, it is no time to chide you now,
But now, Baptists, to your younger daughter:
And show more sign of her obedience,
O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.
For shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit,
I must away to-day, before night come:
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
Unto their lords, by them accomplished:
Nay, I have offer'd all, I have no more,
Re-enter Servingman
garters of an indifferent knit: let them curtsy
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
'cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum:' to the
Why, she hath a face of her own.
Music and poesy use to quicken you,
All things is ready. How near is our master?
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
Come, come, you're mocking: we will have no telling.
Say she be mute and will not speak a word,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.
Exeunt LUCENTIO, BIANCA, and BIONDELLO
Aside
And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.
Exeunt TRANIO, Pedant, and BAPTISTA
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you:
Now I fear thee not:
I say, a husband.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect:
Fiddler, forbear, you grow too forward, sir:
Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her.
I will continue that I broach'd in jest.
I call them forth to credit her.
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,
And therefore, if you say no more than this,
Too little payment for so great a debt.
any, freely give unto you this young scholar,
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.
First were we sad, fearing you would not come,
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify
And graceless traitor to her loving lord?
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench,
beef: ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear, for I
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
Whereof I know she is not ignorant:
I am content.
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
That art to me as secret and as dear
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
Nay, then she must needs come.
Voice, gait and action of a gentlewoman:
I have a daughter, sir, called Katharina.
Another way I have to man my haggard,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt:
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
trust you not, 'Hic steterat Priami,' take heed
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies,
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
O, that once more you knew but what you are!
Enter one with an Officer
A senseless villain! Good Hortensio,
Adonis painted by a running brook,
Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me.
I know it well. What must I call her?
thee, Kate:
A fine musician to instruct our mistress,
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
Thou liest: his father is come from Padua and here
For what reason, I beseech you?
and my good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?
thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the
As I before unparted to your worship,
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?
ever and a day.
If she had not a spirit to resist.
Holla, within!
I am my father's heir and only son:
Sly, old Sly's son of Burtonheath, by birth a
Only, good master, while we do admire
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
The presenters above speak
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love:
I know my remedy, I must go fetch the
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
Madam.
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
I will be sure my Katharina shall be fine.
And bound I am to Padua, there to visit
Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?
Why then, the mustard without the beef.
And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl
That shall be wood and wedded in a day.
There.
Because so well I love Lucentio.
That have beheld me give away myself
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.
As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.
'Tis with cares.
And she to him, to stay him not too long,
O Kate, content thee, prithee, be not angry.
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Now, by my holidame, here comes Katharina!
And watch our vantage in this business:
am undone! I am undone! while I play the good
'C fa ut,' that loves with all affection:
Will undertake to woo curst Katharina,
And with declining head into his bosom,
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
on him, I charge you, in the duke's name. O, my
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katharina, in thy bed:
Her father's liking: which to bring to pass,
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
The better for him: would I were so too!
Dost thou love hawking? thou hast hawks will soar
I.
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
A husband! a devil.
And if I die to-morrow, this is hers,
'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage,
Proceed in practise with my younger daughter,
And make assurance here in Padua
And yet I come not well.
Where's the cook? is supper ready, the house
Where is Lucentio?
I'faith, sir, you shall never need to fear:
Are you so formal, sir? well, I must wait,
'lordship:' I ne'er drank sack in my life, and if
horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I
I'll buckler thee against a million.
Exeunt
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,
Come, Kate, we'll to bed.
Go to my chamber, Put on clothes of mine.
Thus strangers may be hailed and abused: O
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
Or both dissemble deeply their affections:
Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
Marry, peace it bodes, and love and quiet life,
Neighbours and friends, though bride and
to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband,
And twenty more such names and men as these
Exit Haberdasher
What! this gentleman will out-talk us all.
Exit
He kills her in her own humour.
my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in
Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
I doubt it not, sir, but you will curse your
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives,
And rail upon the hostess of the house,
Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
Nay, I will win my wager better yet
O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,
Horns winded. Enter a Lord from hunting, with his train
my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her:
And he knew my deceased father well.
Than three great argosies, besides two galliases,
Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun:
Is that she is intolerable curst
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her:
Yes, keep you warm.
Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is:
Good morrow, Kate, for that's your name, I hear.
Enter a Servant
That, hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue.
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds:
she know me not: if she say I am not fourteen pence
I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first.
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
Of your entire affection to Bianca,
What is the jay more precious than the lark,
Madam, my instrument's in tune.
Full of rose-water and bestrew'd with flowers,
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn,
And kiss me, Kate, we will be married o'Sunday.
With amber bracelets, beads and all this knavery.
And not unluckily against the bias.
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
She will be pleased, then wherefore should I doubt?
O excellent motion! Fellows, let's be gone.
And by good fortune I have lighted well
But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.
While I make way from hence to save my life:
Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip,
'D sol re,' one clef, two notes have I:
Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.
I am in all affected as yourself,
I kill'd a man and fear I was descried:
six time pieced and a woman's crupper of velure,
You will be schoolmaster
Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy!
Where is my wife?
Tut, fear not me.
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Such wind as scatters young men through the world,
This is true that I say: an I had thee
And if I be, sir, is it any offence?
Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
'Madam,' and nothing else: so lords
I will, my lord.
'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white,
I must believe my master, else, I promise you,
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her,
'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round:'
And now you know my meaning,
the university.
O ho, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.
And so, I take my leave, and thank you both.
Our fine musician groweth amorous.
That's my office.
Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
Verona, for a while I take my leave,
Well, well see't. Come, madam wife, sit by my side
Send for your daughter by your servant here:
And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
A course of learning and ingenious studies.
For to supply the places at the table,
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
I cannot tell, expect they are busied about a
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
Well begun, Tranio.
of brown thread: I said a gown.
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?
Enter GREMIO, LUCENTIO in the habit of a mean man,  PETRUCHIO, with HORTENSIO as a musician, and TRANIO, with BIONDELLO bearing a lute and books
And where two raging fires meet together
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca,
A witty mother! witless else her son.
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
As is the other for beauteous modesty.
What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio?
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears:
in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.
thou thimble,
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
Re-enter Servants severally
Re-enter GREMIO
Then well one more may fair Bianca have:
Is't possible you will away to-night?
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves,
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband,
To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm
I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two,
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
'Twere good he were school'd.
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly,
Call you this gamut? tut, I like it not:
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
On this young man, for learning and behavior
And give them friendly welcome every one:
Be merry, Kate. Some water, here, what, ho!
Exit
He calls for wine: 'A health!' quoth he, as if
Hath cost me an hundred crowns since supper-time.
I know him not, but I have heard of him,
For I must hence, and farewell to you all.
Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments,
You know him not, sir.
at home, therefore leave us.
I'll have no bigger: this doth fit the time,
Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left
You break into some merry passion
She's apt to learn and thankful for good turns.
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
Besides, old Gremio is hearkening still,
To come at first when he doth send for her,
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
Exeunt BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and attendants
Master, master! news, old news, and such news as
Exit
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Why, therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold.
See not your bride in these unreverent robes:
Like to a censer in a barber's shop:
SCENE II. Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house.
Lucentio, gentle sir.
'Be serviceable to my son,' quoth he,
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
Drinks to HORTENSIO
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet! a velvet
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering,
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let't alone:
That's your device.
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Enter BAPTISTA, VINCENTIO, GREMIO, the Pedant,  LUCENTIO, BIANCA, PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, HORTENSIO,  and Widow, TRANIO, BIONDELLO, and GRUMIO the Serving-men with Tranio bringing in a banquet
A good swift simile, but something currish.
Let's each one send unto his wife,
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty,
Enter four or five Serving-men
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
I am your wife in all obedience.
Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page,
mistress fallen out.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar:
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
unexperienced to thy grave.
would think scolding would do little good upon him:
I know him well: you are very welcome, sir,
Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
O! we are spoiled and--yonder he is: deny him,
And for I know she taketh most delight
A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack,
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
Should be! should--buzz!
She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
hangs a tale.
Enter one with water
Then go with me to make the matter good.
would 'twere done!
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands:
That feed'st me with the very name of meat:
And me too, good Lord!
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
SCENE III. A room in PETRUCHIO'S house.
he hear us not, 'regia,' presume not, 'celsa senis,'
I confess two sleeves.
To TRANIO
He is coming.
What is his name?
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together,
deceiving father of a deceitful son.
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But here she comes, and now, Petruchio, speak.
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain be doing.
Is more than one,
Let's ha't, good Grumio.
Take you the lute, and you the set of books,
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
To mine own children in good bringing up:
I am content to be Lucentio,
and a head-stall of sheeps leather which, being
Ay, what else? and but I be deceived
under her horse, thou shouldst have heard in how
I'll slit the villain's nose, that would have sent
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
For your physicians have expressly charged,
I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.
And sits as one new-risen from a dream.
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
find when he comes home. But what talk I of this?
And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
And with a low submissive reverence
Nay, then,
How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Away, away! for he is coming hither.
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Ay, the woman's maid of the house.
The motion's good indeed and be it so,
Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, love, stay.
More pleasant, pithy and effectual,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich
O slow-wing'd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee?
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
you never heard of!
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!
Enter PETRUCHIO and GRUMIO
Whate'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
And till she stoop she must not be full-gorged,
And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
And, with that word, she struck me on the head,
Should ask, if Katharina should be his wife,
And time it is, when raging war is done,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
And she can have no more than all I have:
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
Will serve the turn.
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles,
SCENE I. Padua. BAPTISTA'S house.
Say, Signior Gremio, What can you assure her?
You are too blunt: go to it orderly.
Singing
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
I will some other be, some Florentine,
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
By this reckoning he is more shrew than she.
'Tis passing good: I prithee let me have it.
another laced, an old rusty sword ta'en out of the
Peace, Tranio!
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
First, as you know, my house within the city
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
Exit
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
And happily I have arrived at the last
For how I firmly am resolved you know,
The mathematics and the metaphysics,
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparell'd.
Not I, believe me: thus I'll visit her.
A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide!
Enter Haberdasher
Upon the company you overtake?
I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, though
That I disdain: but for these other gawds,
Curster than she? why, 'tis impossible.
bridegroom wants
Here comes Baptista: set your countenance, sir.
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
O, fie, fie, fie!
Error i' the bill, sir, error i' the bill.
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
Antonio, my father, is deceased,
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
Exeunt
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
Now, if you love me, stay.
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Didst thou not say he comes?
ACT I
Which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor:
'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both
if thou account'st it shame. lay it on me,
Help, masters, help! my master is mad.
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart!
One, Kate, that you must kiss, and be acquainted with.
SCENE II. Padua. Before HORTENSIO'S house.
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
Sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest,
Your honour's players, heating your amendment,
Then I'll commend her volubility,
Go, take it up unto thy master's use.
As are the swelling Adriatic seas:
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
'B mi,' Bianca, take him for thy lord,
and then have to't a fresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
I love thee well, in that thou likest it not.
Must stead us all and me amongst the rest,
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of
Here, take away this dish.
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
For, knowing thee to be but young and light--
In token of which duty, if he please,
Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget you, for I
Exit BAPTISTA
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do
I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
This is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,
Therefore paucas pallabris, let the world slide: sessa!
Re-enter PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, BIANCA, BAPTISTA, HORTENSIO, GRUMIO, and Train
Though in some part enforced to digress,
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
that have been more kindly beholding to you than
Some one be ready with a costly suit
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
mistress and be happy rivals in Bianco's love, to
Come, where be these gallants? who's at home?
Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.
And if you break the ice and do this feat,
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
Call'd Katharina, fair and virtuous?
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for:
Take no unkindness of his hasty words:
'Ay, by gogs-wouns,' quoth he, and swore so loud,
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
An if you please to call it a rush-candle,
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,
Mistrust it not: for, sure, AEacides
'Frets, call you these?' quoth she, 'I'll fume
The meat was well, if you were so contented.
Tush, tush! fear boys with bugs.
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate
And better 'twere that both of us did fast,
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
myself, fellow Curtis.
And I do hope good days and long to see.
Come on, i' God's name, once more toward our father's.
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate:
Katharina, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women
Prefer them hither, for to cunning men
Gramercies, lad, go forward, this contents:
That I'll try.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place:
That so I may, by this device, at least
Enter HORTENSIO
Upon entreaty have a present aims,
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
Patience, I pray you, 'twas a fault unwilling.
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
As firmly as yourself were still in place:
warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon
God send you joy, Petruchio! 'tis a match.
Be bride to you, if you this assurance,
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint
Here, noble lord: what is thy will with her?
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Or wilt thou ride? thy horses shall be trapp'd,
But is it true? or else is it your pleasure,
Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer:
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
God give him joy!
Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.
Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
Visit his countrymen and banquet them?
With his good will and thy good company,
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself:
I go.
That I should yet absent me from your bed:
toes look through the over-leather.
Sings
to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed,
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both,
How much she loves me: O, the kindest Kate!
Were he the veriest antic in the world.
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? was ever
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants:
And will not promise her to any man
I have seen them in the church together: God send
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you
Say as he says, or we shall never go.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awaken'd you?
Shall have my Bianca's love.
For she is changed, as she had never been.
And what of him?
A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books!
To her, widow!
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit
Look that you take upon you as you should,
I am Christophero Sly, call not me 'honour' nor
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio.
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe:
And 'tis my hope to end successfully.
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation,
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight
Is it for him you do envy me so?
shall I be appointed hours, as though, belike, I
This will I do, and this I will advise you:
To come to me forthwith.
With ruffs and cuffs and fardingales and things,
wear his sting? In his tail.
Now, fair befal thee, good Petruchio!
Enter TRANIO brave, and BIONDELLO
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
and blue list, an old hat and 'the humour of forty
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
What will be said? what mockery will it be,
'Tis burnt, and so is all the meat.
And so offend him, for I tell you, sirs,
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
Seize thee that list: if once I find thee ranging,
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet:
Re-enter BIONDELLO, with LUCENTIO and BIANCA
bearing my port, 'celsa senis,' that we might
Suitors to her and rivals in my love,
Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
Or so devote to Aristotle's cheques
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
As Anna to the queen of Carthage was,
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown:
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.
Welcome home, Grumio!
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
Tell him from me, as he will win my love,
He bear himself with honourable action,
Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha't.
And awful rule and right supremacy,
On purpose trimm'd up for Semiramis.
There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory,
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
And place your hands below your husband's foot:
And, let your father make her the assurance,
What said the wench when he rose again?
mind is: Why give him gold enough and marry him to
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these
She may more suitors have and me for one.
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
And tells us, what occasion of import
whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon
Exeunt BIANCA and Servant
My remedy is then, to pluck it out.
you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news?
would take her with all faults, and money enough.
comes there any more of it?
how the young folks lay their heads together!
The gain I seek is, quiet in the match.
belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me: but
Re-enter Servants with supper
with them:'
Come hither, crack-hemp.
By your firm promise: Gremio is out-vied.
That's but a cavil: he is old, I young.
Keep house and port and servants as I should:
Enter PETRUCHIO and HORTENSIO with meat
Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
Call them forth.
Who shall begin?
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
O, ho! entreat her!
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day
Of Mantua.
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
But I am doubtful of your modesties,
Your ships are stay'd at Venice, and the duke,
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
Nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
I gave him no order, I gave him the stuff.
Not so well apparell'd
As Stephen Sly and did John Naps of Greece
of my master's horse-tail till they kiss their
sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself,
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
You have show'd a tender fatherly regard,
Why will you mew her up,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers,
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
If she be curst, it is for policy,
No, nor to-morrow, not till I please myself.
Enter BIONDELLO
In gait and countenance surely like a father.
[To VINCENTIO]  Why, how now, gentleman! why, this
with the horse upon her, how he beat me because
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Enter Tailor
No, if without more words you will get you hence.
Such as he hath observed in noble ladies
near-legged before and with, a half-chequed bit
This favour will I do you for his sake,
countenance my mistress.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests,
O, ay, Curtis, ay: and therefore fire, fire, cast
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
'Hic steterat,' and that Lucentio that comes
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
This gentleman is happily arrived,
Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow:
In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns,
You have but jested with me all this while:
This way the coverlet, another way the sheets:
O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see,
name is Tranio.
friends, it shall be so far forth friendly
How now! what's the matter? My old friend Grumio!
He wrings him by the ears
ALL SERVING-MEN	Here, here, sir, here, sir.
And her withholds from me and other more,
Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood,
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
Thou must be married to no man but me,
Just as my master had direction:
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers:
Now let me see if I can construe it: 'Hic ibat
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree:
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Sir, my mistress sends you word
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie:
What, up and down, carved like an apple-tart?
But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger:
And say, 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
See where she comes and brings your froward wives
Ay, and he'll tame her.
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
I am content you shall entreat me stay,
When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand.
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
Exit Servingman
without asking my good will?
I would your duty were as foolish too:
Enter BIANCA and LUCENTIO
I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.
For he fears none.
I never saw a better-fashion'd gown,
In resolution as I swore before.
Strikes her
Exit from above
Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
Enter VINCENTIO
cuff was but to knock at your ear, and beseech
Well, I say no: and therefore for assurance
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.'
foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress,--
Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?
How now, old lad?
What, master, read you? first resolve me that.
The old priest of Saint Luke's church is at your
To want the bridegroom when the priest attends
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains:
They're busy within, you were best knock louder.
Amen.
They are.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
To know the cause why music was ordain'd!
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
They sit and mark
I am content, in a good father's care,
I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away,
I'll none of it: hence! make your best of it.
Beggars, that come unto my father's door,
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
My daughter Katharina is to be married:
Construe them.
Sound, sound, sound, sound!
I am no breeching scholar in the schools,
I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.
Why, no, for she hath broke the lute to me.
My father dead, my fortune lives for me,
[Seeing BIONDELLO]
The mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself,
I told him that your father was at Venice,
Katharina the curst!
Good sooth, even thus, therefore ha' done with words:
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.
[Reads]  ''Gamut' I am, the ground of all accord,
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Go, get thee gone, I say.
Enter aloft SLY, with Attendants, some with apparel, others with basin and ewer and appurtenances, and Lord
Until the elder sister first be wed:
Were it better, I should rush in thus.
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
You whoreson villain! will you let it fall?
Hortensio, and I trow this is his house.
Then at my lodging, an it like you:
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep
Whatever fortune stays him from his word:
In his tongue.
He that has the two fair daughters: is't he you mean?
What, is the man lunatic?
I tell you, 'tis incredible to believe
My name is call'd Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,
No, not a whit: I find you passing gentle.
How now! who is it?
use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see,
If you strike me, you are no gentleman,
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn,
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
make merry withal?
'pointed day.
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,
To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end,
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
Evermore cross'd and cross'd, nothing but cross'd!
Bianca's grief.
And makes a god of such a cullion:
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
Here love, thou see'st how diligent I am
Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, I'll ring it,
Than any woman in this waning age.
Let's see, I think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
We be affied and such assurance ta'en
And that's a wonder: fathers commonly
I know not what, but format in apparel,
Which I have better'd rather than decreased:
I'll find about the making of the bed,
Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!
O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
Pedant looks out of the window
Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA
And slept above some fifteen year or more.
Do what thou canst, I will not go to-day,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
Proceed.
God-a-mercy, Grumio! then he shall have no odds.
Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
Father, be quiet, he shall stay my leisure.
'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.
She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
Tell me thine first.
Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,
Who knows not that?
And what of him, Tranio?
Here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
Faith, as cold as can be.
She strikes him
Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world,
For this poor furniture and mean array.
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
My land amounts not to so much in all:
But after many ceremonies done,
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
Will I live?
Soft son!
She is your treasure, she must have a husband,
afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to
Nay then, I will not: you shall have the mustard,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded,
to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good
O this learning, what a thing it is!
will thaw.
Exit BIONDELLO
O, let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt.
Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry:
Then take him up and manage well the jest:
Say that she rail, why then I'll tell her plain
But, soft! company is coming here.
Thou art a fool: if Echo were as fleet,
All but the base.
And twenty caged nightingales do sing:
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.
why, that's nothing, an he begin once, he'll rail in
Enter a Servant
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
good, here's none will hold you. Their love is not
Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks,
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
I am afraid, sir,
So said, so done, is well.
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Twenty crowns.
And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful!
besides, possessed with the glanders and like to mose
Glad that you thus continue your resolve
Exit
Exeunt
[Aside]  Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.
Or is the adder better than the eel,
man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will
Re-enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and TRANIO
I hold you a penny,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
I have it, Tranio.
And twice as much, whate'er thou offer'st next.
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,
How?
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
O, very well, I have perused the note.
Well, go with me and be not so discomfited:
O master, master, I have watch'd so long
SCENE I. Padua. Before LUCENTIO'S house.
This do and do it kindly, gentle sirs:
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
Enter PETRUCHIO and his man GRUMIO
son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?
Exit BIANCA
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
You were a moveable.
Exit weeping, followed by BIANCA and others
I may, and will, if she be so contented:
Exit
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA
Ay, but not frighted me, therefore I'll sleep again.
Of all mad matches never was the like.
The wager thou hast won, and I will add
And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down:
To her, Kate!
Why, what's a moveable?
And then?
And you, sir! you are welcome.
bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten,
And so farewell. Katharina, you may stay,
No, sir, God forbid, but ashamed to kiss.
Away with it! come, let me have a bigger.
Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid!
My household stuff, my field, my barn,
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice,
Where is that damned villain Tranio,
And there I stood amazed for a while,
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.
Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.
Love me or love me not, I like the cap,
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
Exit
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Then show it me.
Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow!
But if you have a stomach, to't i' God's name:
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Twenty crowns!
With wealth enough and young and beauteous,
No, no, forsooth, I dare not for my life.
How now, Grumio!
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
Thy head, thy sovereign, one that cares for thee,
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.
Here's packing, with a witness to deceive us all!
Softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
hands. Are they all ready?
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face,
Affection is not rated from the heart:
SCENE II. Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house.
Welcome, you,--how now, you,-- what, you,--fellow,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
Now, fellows, you are welcome.
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.
And let me have them very well perfumed
Since once he play'd a farmer's eldest son:
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?
Travelling some journey, to repose him here.
What, do you grumble? I'll be with you straight.
Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
As he shall think by our true diligence
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
When they are bound to serve, love and obey.
Which, at more leisure, I will so excuse
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine, and
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
Here, sirrah Grumio, knock, I say.
Stay, officer: he shall not go to prison.
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,
How but well, sir? how but well?
The door is open, sir, there lies your way,
the chronicles, we came in with Richard Conqueror.
hose! a scarlet cloak! and a copatain hat! O, I
No tongue! all eyes! be silent.
will pour some in thy other mouth.
being but half a fish and half a monster?
Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad,
Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters.
And worship this dull fool!
creep under his gaberdine, there is no other
As Hymen's lamps shall light you.
There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix
Exeunt
They sing:
Enter FERDINAND, bearing a log
He will be talking.
And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
My lord it shall be done.
O, was she so? I must
Would I might
recover him, I will help his ague. Come. Amen! I
This is the mouth o' the cell: no noise, and enter.
And rest myself content.
Of her society
Enter Mariners
Alas, the storm is come again! my best way is to
If I have too austerely punish'd you,
Of whom your swords are temper'd, may as well
No, I warrant you, I will not adventure
Fetch in our wood and serves in offices
And be a boy right out.
Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.
Rich scarf to my proud earth, why hath thy queen
here? a man or a fish? dead or alive? A fish:
I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir
To make this contract grow: but barren hate,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The watch-dogs bark!
for my part, the sea cannot drown me, I swam, ere I
Pardon, master,
And that a strange one too, which did awake me:
My dear son Ferdinand.
This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall
Do now attend the queen? Since they did plot
Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now
At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye
And makes my labours pleasures: O, she is
Do not infest your mind with beating on
A thing most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes
Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.
The king and queen there! that they were, I wish
No.
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales
hath no drowning mark upon him, his complexion is
I have done nothing but in care of thee,
her to try with main-course.
My husband, then?
is not this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under
May now provoke them to.
Let liberty make use of, space enough
Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we find
glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with
Prithee, say on:
Hath made his meal on thee?
SCENE I. Before PROSPERO'S cell.
Make the prize light.
monster, or my standard.
That profit us. What, ho! slave! Caliban!
'Twas you we laughed at.
Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile.
Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh
After summer merrily.
I have with such provision in mine art
The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero:
Swears he will shoot no more but play with sparrows
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
O, a cherubim
Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool,--
The strangeness of your story put
Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour
When it is baked with frost.
You are gentlemen of brave metal, you would lift
To answer thy best pleasure, be't to fly,
First to possess his books, for without them
Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, GONZALO, ADRIAN, FRANCISCO, and others
have my music for nothing.
Holy Gonzalo, honourable man,
Of sulphurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
Exit
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to
Can be at once, shall step by step attend
In the very end of harvest!
And suck'd my verdure out on't. Thou attend'st not.
Ay.
Let us be jocund: will you troll the catch
Yet,--
Which entered their frail shins: at last I left them
What a pied ninny's this! Thou scurvy patch!
All points of my command.
Will shortly fill the reasonable shore
Fury, Fury! there, Tyrant, there! hark! hark!
I thank thee for that jest, here's a garment for't:
Without a parallel, those being all my study,
A chough of as deep chat. O, that you bore
Lie there, my art. Wipe thou thine eyes, have comfort.
Swum ashore. man, like a duck: I can swim like a
Your royal fleet far off.
What thou shouldst be: the occasion speaks thee, and
Whose watery arch and messenger am I,
More that I may call men than you, good friend,
[Aside]              Honest lord,
Behold, sir king,
Will cry it o'er again: it is a hint
Shall hoodwink this mischance: therefore speak softly.
It is a sleepy language and thou speak'st
Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee
But never saw before, of whom I have
Or else our spell is marr'd.
Pointing to Caliban
Or Night kept chain'd below.
Harmoniously charmingly. May I be bold
son,
I' th' afternoon to sleep: there thou mayst brain him,
A devil, a born devil, on whose nature
As you like this, give me the lie another time.
A falsehood in its contrary as great
Come, swear to that, kiss the book: I will furnish
Nor can imagination form a shape,
Beat him enough: after a little time
The wild waves whist,
Or sent to Naples. Let me not,
They cannot budge till your release. The king,
Exit CALIBAN
'Tis time
Ceres' blessing so is on you.
I did say so,
This is some monster of the isle with four legs, who
cast ashore.
did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen,
cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul
O'er-prized all popular rate, in my false brother
By this good light, this is a very shallow monster!
And they to him are angels.
By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
Although they want the use of tongue, a kind
Ha, ha, ha! So, you're paid.
If these be true spies which I wear in my head,
I will kneel to him.
The sound is going away, let's follow it, and
Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated
Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle
A dollar.
There shalt thou find the mariners asleep
off.
by the lesser legs: if any be Trinculo's legs,
To FERDINAND
Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou
O, ho, monster! we know what belongs to a frippery.
This is strange: your father's in some passion
Follow me.
By foul play, as thou say'st, were we heaved thence,
Untie the spell.
And princess no worse issued.
From what a torment I did free thee?
Ay, and a subtle, as he most learnedly delivered.
ALONSO, SEBASTIAN  and c. draw their swords
If of life you keep a care,
Miranda.--O my father,
Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
Alas, now, pray you,
Mercy itself and frees all faults.
On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer
What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
Not only with what my revenue yielded,
Now useless, boil'd within thy skull! There stand,
Which throes thee much to yield.
Comes to the entertainer--
Which when he has a house, he'll deck withal
Come on.
Come forth, I say! there's other business for thee:
Have just our theme of woe, but for the miracle,
I have eyed with best regard and many a time
O, wonder!
Beseech you, father.
I chose her when I could not ask my father
The mind that I do! what a sleep were this
Some heavenly music, which even now I do,
For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way
O ho, O ho! would't had been done!
and give it his son for an apple.
Those are pearls that were his eyes:
The man i' the moon's too slow--till new-born chins
To the shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bow'd,
Be it so! Amen!
Tell not me, when the butt is out, we will drink
Or ere your pulse twice beat.
Diffusest honey-drops, refreshing showers,
His brother and yours, abide all three distracted
born to be hanged, our case is miserable.
Well done! avoid, no more!
Who would believe that there were mountaineers
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket
Be collected:
When no man was his own.
[Sings drunkenly]
Of its own kind, all foison, all abundance,
Begun to tell me what I am, but stopp'd
[Aside]                It works.
I will discase me, and myself present
And after bite me, then like hedgehogs which
Are nobly undergone and most poor matters
Whereof the ewe not bites, and you whose pastime
My man-monster hath drown'd his tongue in sack:
And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate
A plague upon this howling! they are louder than
In a poor isle and all of us ourselves
Earth's increase, foison plenty,
O,
I will tell no tales.
Much feater than before: my brother's servants
of Nobody.
It should the good ship so have swallow'd and
Thou hast said well, for some of you there present
Most sure, the goddess
I heard nothing.
Than you should such dishonour undergo,
On the bat's back I do fly
Bound sadly home for Naples,
'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.
Is rounded with a sleep. Sir, I am vex'd,
Good, speak to the mariners: fall to't, yarely,
Hey, Mountain, hey!
I'll kiss thy foot, I'll swear myself thy subject.
Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed,
But this thing dare not,--
Why, what did I? I did nothing. I'll go farther
bear my bottle: fellow Trinculo, we'll fill him by
To make cold nymphs chaste crowns, and thy broom -groves,
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
Perform'd, my Ariel, a grace it had, devouring:
Of ever angry bears: it was a torment
He shall drink nought but brine, for I'll not show him
The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,
If thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly
My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know,
[Aside]  These be fine things, an if they be
The hour's now come,
the moon when time was.
Is almost come.
I have no hope
If I speak true! if hollowly, invert
Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions:
heart to beat him,--
Presently?
Sir, I invite your highness and your train
Here, master: what cheer?
out of my kingdom: go to, carry this.
'Lord' quoth he! That a monster should be such a natural!
With eyes wide open, standing, speaking, moving,
Show thee a jay's nest and instruct thee how
Now 'gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you
So is mine. Do you hear, monster? If I should take
All the infections that the sun sucks up
Exit
For he's a spirit of persuasion, only
Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
Made such a sinner of his memory,
I will be correspondent to command
I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not
Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up, urchins
You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,
Therefore, my lord,--
A match!
Sir, have pity,
What is your name?
We say befits the hour.
So they are,
[Aside]	Praise in departing.
That hath to instrument this lower world
When I have deck'd the sea with drops full salt,
ALONSO sleeps. Exit ARIEL
With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks,
Allaying both their fury and my passion
cabins: you do assist the storm.
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed
So have we all, of joy, for our escape
But, O, how oddly will it sound that I
My brave spirit!
Prithee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.
To every article.
As mountain winds: but then exactly do
I warrant you sir,
No, it begins again.
Though fools at home condemn 'em.
Kill the still-closing waters, as diminish
That shall be by and by: I remember the story.
From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him
Exit
More to know
Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples
Some god o' the island. Sitting on a bank,
His tears run down his beard, like winter's drops
The surge most swoln that met him, his bold head
And all the rest o' the fleet.
Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar
good natures
Than bees that made 'em.
A thing divine, for nothing natural
Shall be my precedent, as thou got'st Milan,
And mine shall.
And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!
hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?
My mistress, dearest,
Monster, lay-to your fingers: help to bear this
And these fresh nymphs encounter every one
Your compensation makes amends, for I
Nor fetch in firing
And make thy weapon drop.
duck, thou art made like a goose.
I will have none on't: we shall lose our time,
Or cut his wezand with thy knife. Remember
These happen'd accidents, till when, be cheerful
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
Before you can say 'come' and 'go,'
he vent Trinculos?
Shall, for that vast of night that they may work,
lie,
the weather or our office.
The fresh-brook muscles, wither'd roots and husks
What foul play had we, that we came from thence?
For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise
And watch your safety.
Burthen [dispersedly, within
There is some space.
'Tis far off
Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody thoughts.
and so shall Trinculo.
This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod
How does thy honour? Let me lick thy shoe.
As many vouched rarities are.
this can sack and drinking do. A murrain on
And thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky-hard,
Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
the moon! A most poor credulous monster! Well
I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
What is this same?
Speak not you for him, he's a traitor. Come,
The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither,
He'ld sow't with nettle-seed.
Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter:
For thou must now know farther.
Subject his coronet to his crown and bend
Well.
He is as disproportion'd in his manners
when they will not give a doit to relieve a lame
The jewel in my dower, I would not wish
Let me live here ever,
When he is earth'd, hath here almost persuade,--
Their manners are more gentle-kind than of
As thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant,
And sail so expeditious that shall catch
Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth
Moon-calf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a
man, any strange beast there makes a man:
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in
Into a cloven pine, within which rift
My strong imagination sees a crown
Hourly joys be still upon you!
Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou: I would my
'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father
counsellor, if you can command these elements to
Where thou mayst knock a nail into his bead.
Sir, he may live:
Been justled from your senses, know for certain
What things are these, my lord Antonio?
The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats,
Exactly is perform'd: but there's more work.
Which to you shall seem probable, of every
If I did think, sir, I were well awake,
With so fun soul, but some defect in her
Good things will strive to dwell with't.
They have left their viands behind, for we have stomachs.
He was indeed the duke, out o' the substitution
Dost thou hear?
Stephano!
Exit
What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?
Aside to ARIEL
My language! heavens!
Seems to cry out, 'How shall that Claribel
To the perpetual wink for aye might put
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
His mother was a witch, and one so strong
And give it way: I know thou canst not choose.
saw you last that, I fear me, will never out of
Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
Alack, for pity!
Upon your heads--is nothing but heart-sorrow
Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive
For quiet days, fair issue and long life,
Long continuance, and increasing,
To the most of men this is a Caliban
Where I have hope to see the nuptial
Didst thou not say he lied?
I'll bear your logs the while: pray, give me that,
I pray now, keep below.
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
Instinctively had quit it: there they hoist us,
Hark, hark!
Who's the next heir of Naples?
Whether thou best he or no,
I thank thee, master.
Yet he would be king on't.
I rather think
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
I saw their weapons drawn: there was a noise,
My father's of a better nature, sir,
Save for the son that she did litter here,
As I hope
Capering to eye her: on a trice, so please you,
Mine eyes, even sociable to the show of thine,
And show'd thee all the qualities o' the isle,
To still my beating mind.
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we
To no sight but thine and mine, invisible
This deity in my bosom: twenty consciences,
And these mine enemies are all knit up
And I would call it, fair play.
Stand to and do as we.
Incite them to quick motion, for I must
And here was left by the sailors. Thou, my slave,
He that dies pays all debts: I defy thee. Mercy upon us!
SCENE II. Another part of the island.
No marrying 'mong his subjects?
What would my potent master? here I am.
O'erstunk their feet.
Here on this grass-plot, in this very place,
Remember I have done thee worthy service,
Point to rich ends. This my mean task
Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you god,
What I shall die to want. But this is trifling,
Out three years old.
Towards their project. Then I beat my tabour,
O the heavens!
Work not so hard: I would the lightning had
That there are unicorns, that in Arabia
Our king and company, the next, our ship--
A treacherous army levied, one midnight
And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
Tooth'd briers, sharp furzes, pricking goss and thorns,
and make a stock-fish of thee.
Which was, that he, in lieu o' the premises
To FERDINAND
This cell's my court: here have I few attendants
And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
I'll warrant him for drowning, though the ship were
Hark, they roar!
any weather at all, and another storm brewing,
Let's all sink with the king.
Of his bones are coral made,
and make a vassal of him.
And executing the outward face of royalty,
Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first
I say, by sorcery he got this isle,
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!
SPOKEN BY PROSPERO
ACT III
Here is everything advantageous to life.
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Re-enter SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, and GONZALO
Spirits, which by mine art
Sit then and talk with her, she is thine own.
Their several kinds have done. My high charms work
Fall fellowly drops. The charm dissolves apace,
And left me to a bootless inquisition,
Than you may call to comfort you, for I
Brimful of sorrow and dismay, but chiefly
I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded
what a wardrobe here is for thee!
What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
Did never meddle with my thoughts.
There are yet missing of your company
Noble Sebastian,
Hark, hark! I hear
With all prerogative: hence his ambition growing--
for my labour.
How many goodly creatures are there here!
O, but one word.
That sort was well fished for.
Exeunt
Behold this maid: all corners else o' the earth
For every trifle are they set upon me,
Hence! hang not on my garments.
Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
Safely in harbour
A time before we came unto this cell?
I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand,
This isle with Calibans.
The washing of ten tides!
I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
To see a goodlier man.
Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service
His arms in this sad knot.
to you: so you may continue and laugh at
And my dear father: how features are abroad,
Monster, I do smell all horse-piss, at
I'll manacle thy neck and feet together:
This visitation shows it.
Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.
else being drowned, we will inherit here: here,
A laughter.
after do our work.
And have no vigour in them.
Come with a thought I thank thee, Ariel: come.
Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her,
There's meaning in thy snores.
Wherefore weep you?
Worthily purchased take my daughter: but
Be measured or confined.
O, widow Dido! ay, widow Dido.
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
Stephano, two Neapolitans 'scaped!
This wide-chapp'd rascal--would thou mightst lie drowning
Marvellous sweet music!
That's not the tune.
In an odd angle of the isle and sitting,
There's no harm done.
To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorax
Enter a Master and a Boatswain
And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle--
Their eyes do offices of truth, their words
I'll beat him too.
Ariel plays the tune on a tabour and pipe
That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly
Go to, away!
But that I do not.
Gentle breath of yours my sails
Both, both, my girl:
That you shall hate it both: therefore take heed,
of silver: there would this monster make a
To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit,
no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an
Servant-monster! the folly of this island! They
Weigh'd between loathness and obedience, at
So, slave, hence!
should he learn our language? I will give him some
MIRANDA sleeps
I shall be pinch'd to death.
Delight in them sets off: some kinds of baseness
But you, my brace of lords, were I so minded,
I fear you have done yourself some wrong: a word.
Honour, riches, marriage-blessing,
For this one night, which, part of it, I'll waste
She that is queen of Tunis, she that dwells
speak to me: for I am Trinculo--be not afeard--thy
Long live Gonzalo!
Mark his condition and the event, then tell me
The gunner and his mate
And his more braver daughter could control thee,
[Aside] It goes on, I see,
That I am Prospero and that very duke
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
Foul weather?
I'll not serve him, he's not valiant.
That yet looks on me, or would know me Ariel,
have spoken truer than you purposed.
played the Jack with us.
All sanctimonious ceremonies may
Here, swear then how thou escapedst.
Fated to the purpose did Antonio open
Must know and own, this thing of darkness!
Claribel.
How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,
I will stand to and feed,
The noontide sun, call'd forth the mutinous winds,
die a dry death.
Were most impertinent.
Myself were mudded in that oozy bed
Sings
Look he's winding up the watch of his wit,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
And my ending is despair,
their ears,
Master of this design, did give us, with
Who having into truth, by telling of it,
Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,
Is the king's ship, in the deep nook, where once
With full and holy rite be minister'd,
talking. Trinculo, the king and all our company
Mine honour into lust, to take away
Open-eyed conspiracy
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes
Stand farther. Come, proceed.
Art thou afeard?
good friend Trinculo.
For you are spell-stopp'd.
Thou shalt be lord of it and I'll serve thee.
Some thousands of these logs and pile them up,
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast, the very rats
As well as it does you: and I should do it
No, wench, it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
open your chaps again.
Boatswain!
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
Do you love me?
For raising this sea-storm?
Dost thou attend me?
Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
Fair encounter
To be inclined my way!
Nurture can never stick, on whom my pains,
I cannot too much muse
Awake, awake!
wits and bearing too? A pox o' your bottle!
While I sit lazy by.
Ready to drop upon me that, when I waked,
Weak masters though ye be, I have bedimm'd
Take the ear strangely.
And say what thou seest yond.
Would be as heavy to me as odious, but
Is hard at study, pray now, rest yourself,
Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?
Is a plain fish, and, no doubt, marketable.
For the like loss I have her sovereign aid
If thou remember'st aught ere thou camest here,
Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and
Are natural breath: but, howsoe'er you have
Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
And brought us thus together?
The means that dusky Dis my daughter got,
Were wreck'd upon this shore, where I have lost--
And how does your content
tricks upon's with savages and men of Ind, ha? I
And yours it is against.
friend, his backward voice is to utter foul speeches
High'st queen of state,
I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er ears
In yours and my discharge.
But none of us cared for Kate,
And burn in many places, on the topmast,
This lady makes him to me.
Come, thou tortoise! when?
Leave your crisp channels and on this green land
The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
Your lieutenant, if you list, he's no standard.
Shake it off. Come on,
Was the first man that leap'd, cried, 'Hell is empty
who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that
There be some sports are painful, and their labour
Exeunt
What stuff is this! how say you?
The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning!
Is tight and yare and bravely rigg'd as when
unstanched wench.
Brought my too diligent ear: for several virtues
A human shape.
How fares my gracious sir?
Enter CALIBAN
Enter IRIS
Out of this fearful country!
Beyond a common joy, and set it down
Some vanity of mine art: it is my promise,
Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints
I prithee now, lead the way without any more
We must prepare to meet with Caliban.
ARIEL'S song.
Shall I twice lose.
And breathe twice and cry 'so, so,'
A rotten carcass of a boat, not rigg'd,
hey-day, freedom!
And a clear life ensuing.
One thing or other: when thou didst not, savage,
Trinculo, run into no further danger:
All torment, trouble, wonder and amazement
In a cowslip's bell I lie,
I needs must rest me.
will be king and queen--save our graces!--and
You did supplant your brother Prospero.
To think but nobly of my grandmother:
Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple
Fairly spoke.
A hearty welcome.
Just as you left them, all prisoners, sir,
Come unto these yellow sands,
Against my very heart. Poor souls, they perish'd.
A prince of power.
His forward voice now is to speak well of his
And left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans
it anon with new contents swear.
But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost
And by that destiny to perform an act
escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors
O, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear,
Whiles we stood here securing your repose,
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.
And rather like a dream than an assurance
He misses not much.
To bate me a full year.
Ay, with a twink.
Ten leagues beyond man's life, she that from Naples
Lo, lo, again! bite him to death, I prithee.
Of whom so often I have heard renown,
Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate
Which is not yet perform'd me.
It must needs be of subtle, tender and delicate
Beats as of flesh and blood, and, since I saw thee,
As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
Thou art pinch'd fort now, Sebastian. Flesh and blood,
Though thou didst learn, had that in't which
art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art
My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
Take with you your companions, as you look
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil,
Our sorrow with our comfort.
I'ld strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep,
Dew-lapp'd like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em
The whole butt, man: my cellar is in a rock by the
No more amazement: tell your piteous heart
heaved o'erboard, by this bottle, which I made of
He could not miss't.
A word, good sir,
I'll carry it to the pile.
Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours:
And more diversity of sounds, all horrible,
Would I admit, no name of magistrate,
And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass
Do not smile at me that I boast her off,
A living drollery. Now I will believe
Wilt thou destroy him then?
You were kneel'd to and importuned otherwise
Some few odd lads that you remember not.
None that I more love than myself. You are a
Why, how now, Stephano!
How thou hast met us here, who three hours since
Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not
Alack, for mercy!
And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
As stooping to relieve him: I not doubt
Against my life: the minute of their plot
And what is in't, the never-surfeited sea
You may deny me, but I'll be your servant,
long spoon.
That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
Exeunt
You'ld be king o' the isle, sirrah?
Nay, good my lord, be not angry.
Aside
Do you not hear me speak?
Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
Hang, cur! hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker!
But fresher than before: and, as thou badest me,
Brought to this shore, and by my prescience
He's but a sot, as I am, nor hath not
So safely ordered that there is no soul--
Yes, Caliban her son.
I am hers:
Enter Mariners wet
I remember
In this last tempest. I perceive these lords
Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!
monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.
To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands,
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
If by your art, my dearest father, you have
To dote thus on such luggage? Let's alone
Thou strokedst me and madest much of me, wouldst give me
He thinks me now incapable, confederates--
O, forgive me my sins!
As if it had lungs and rotten ones.
Will money buy 'em?
With that which, but by being so retired,
I have been in such a pickle since I
I have from their confines call'd to enact
These three have robb'd me, and this demi-devil--
Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library
Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.
Thou must restore.
not take too much for him, he shall pay for him that
Re-enter ARIEL, driving in CALIBAN, STEPHANO and TRINCULO, in their stolen apparel
This was well done, my bird.
I would not for the world.
Exeunt ANTONIO and SEBASTIAN
SCENE I. Before PROSPERO'S Cell.
You taught me language, and my profit on't
Which thou forget'st. This damn'd witch Sycorax,
A confused noise within:   'Mercy on us!'--  'We split, we split!'--'Farewell, my wife and  children!'-- 'Farewell, brother!'--'We split, we split, we split!'
Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou
A heaviness that's gone.
And sight-outrunning were not, the fire and cracks
But, for your conscience?
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!
When Prospero is destroyed.
No matter, since
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
That thou attend me: thou dost here usurp
That wrings mine eyes to't.
Come on your ways, open your mouth, here is that
Whether you will or no.
If he were that which now he's like, that's dead,
Now the condition.
All hail, great master! grave sir, hail! I come
To every eyeball else. Go take this shape
Be living and be here?
Dearly my delicate Ariel. Do not approach
Solemn music
Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split--
My master through his art foresees the danger
Ay, sir, where lies that? if 'twere a kibe,
Enter TRINCULO
Therefore my son i' the ooze is bedded, and
That now hath seized them, why, they were no worse
Thou didst prevent me, I had peopled else
The government I cast upon my brother
Very well.
On that which breeds between 'em!
What a blow was there given!
What impossible matter will he make easy next?
But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours,
You do yet taste
If you be pleased, retire into my cell
for the liquor is not earthly.
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.
That has such people in't!
Prithee, peace.
Come on then, down, and swear.
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
Who hath cause to wet the grief on't.
Thou wondrous man.
and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant,
Good wombs have borne bad sons.
Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso,
At mine unworthiness that dare not offer
Cutting the clouds towards Paphos and her son
Myself disposed to sleep.
beginning.
Till half an hour hence.
Aside to ARIEL
Thou shalt be free
out of hope.
And to thee and thy company I bid
And as with age his body uglier grows,
I might call him
Pray, set it down and rest you: when this burns,
How fine my master is! I am afraid
Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew
Juno and Ceres whisper seriously,
This is a scurvy tune too: but here's my comfort.
At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any
Hast thou, spirit,
Though this island seem to be desert,--
Thunder and lightning. Enter ARIEL, like a  harpy, claps his wings upon the table, and, with a quaint device, the banquet vanishes
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
Our human generation you shall find
while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.
O, touch me not, I am not Stephano, but a cramp.
The name of Prosper: it did bass my trespass.
If thou dost break her virgin-knot before
They are both in either's powers, but this swift business
This is a strange thing as e'er I look'd on.
And are upon the Mediterranean flote,
Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not
I should sin
Exit ARIEL
and that soundly: you cannot tell who's your friend:
That's my noble master!
For she had a tongue with a tang,
No, noble mistress,'tis fresh morning with me
Tell me, heavenly bow,
Methinks I do.
Of the king's ship
The queen of Naples.
At which, like unback'd colts, they prick'd
On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,
And presently, I prithee.
For learning me your language!
Are ministers of Fate: the elements,
What I desire to give, and much less take
off.
You fools! I and my fellows
Wherefore this ghastly looking?
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak:
Than pard or cat o' mountain.
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
To him you follow'st! I will pay thy graces
Each one, tripping on his toe,
Sings in GONZALO's ear
Foot it featly here and there,
Do hiss me into madness.
So glad of this as they I cannot be,
Hear a foot fall: we now are near his cell.
Thou most lying slave,
I'll believe both,
Was in the wreck, and, but he's something stain'd
You cram these words into mine ears against
Enter PROSPERO in his magic robes, and ARIEL
The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
of them, if th' other two be brained like us, the
O, good sir, I do.
Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis,
How now shall this be compassed?
Not I.
But that the sea, mounting to the welkin's cheek,
So is she heir of Naples, 'twixt which regions
Well, I have done: but yet,--
Whether this be
And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
their queen.
I go, I go.
What is't thou canst demand?
I do believe it
Prospero my lord shall know what I have done:
No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall
By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make,
Abhorred slave,
Full fathom five thy father lies,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Which was thrust forth of Milan, who most strangely
In the same fashion as you gave in charge,
SCENE II. The island. Before PROSPERO'S cell.
Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue
Then, as my gift and thine own acquisition
choose but fall by pailfuls. What have we
How to deny them, who to advance and who
Confined together
In the line-grove which weather-fends your cell,
That Ferdinand is drown'd?
I pray thee, mark me.
[Aside to PROSPERO]          Was't well done?
Upon a sore injunction: my sweet mistress
Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drown'd,
SCENE I. On a ship at sea: a tempestuous noise
Mine enemy has more power.
For I can here disarm thee with this stick
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards:
Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,
Were then my fellows, now they are my men.
I find my zenith doth depend upon
Through all the signories it was the first
In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,
The fringed curtains of thine eye advance
Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men
Enter CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO
Farewell master, farewell, farewell!
Not a hair perish'd,
Shake off slumber, and beware:
If now 'twere fit to do't. At the first sight
Upon this island as a spy, to win it
My old bones ache: here's a maze trod indeed
Nor go neither, but you'll lie like dogs and yet say
swear by this bottle how thou camest hither. I
or we run ourselves aground: bestir, bestir.
Did worthily perform, and I must use you
That e'er I sigh'd for: pity move my father
Exeunt CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO
Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero
Sounds and sweet airs, that give delight and hurt not.
Too much the rein: the strongest oaths are straw
This airy charm is for, I'll break my staff,
With much more ease, for my good will is to it,
One: tell.
This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who
Enter PROSPERO, FERDINAND, and MIRANDA
O Stephano. hast any more of this?
my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh
Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!
Irreparable is the loss, and patience
I will resist such entertainment till
as once I was, and had but this fish painted,
Monster, your fairy, which you say is
Melting the darkness, so their rising senses
Juno sings her blessings upon you.
Ay, with a heart as willing
I must obey: his art is of such power,
these are they. Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How
And the particular accidents gone by
It is a comforter.
O, woe the day!
sea again, lay her off.
Approach, my Ariel, come.
For bringing wood in slowly. I'll fall flat,
For he's a bastard one--had plotted with them
cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make
And yet me thinks I see it in thy face,
And hinder them from what this ecstasy
Here shall I die ashore--
The strain of strutting chanticleer
And his and mine loved darling.
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.
The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good
Much business appertaining.
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd
Such shapes, such gesture and such sound, expressing,
Sir, in Argier.
Yet again! what do you here? Shall we give o'er
A solemn air and the best comforter
I'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject,
widow Dido!
Drinks
Whiles thou art waking.
Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?
That stand 'twixt me and Milan, candied be they
Dost thou think so, spirit?
The rest o' the island.
The gates of Milan, and, i' the dead of darkness,
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an
Our royal, good and gallant ship, our master
And the remainder mourning over them,
How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!
SCENE I. Another part of the island.
A vision of the Island, one dear son
To be the lord on't. No more yet of this,
I say, Amen, Gonzalo!
Or else, good night your vow!
Be patient, for the prize I'll bring thee to
With dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews
Exeunt SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO
And as the morning steals upon the night,
The white cold virgin snow upon my heart
Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount
raised the wall and houses too.
pass of pate, there's another garment for't.
When I wore it at your daughter's marriage?
It is the quality o' the climate.
Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang!
I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking,
I did not give the lie. Out o' your
When you are cloudy.
Ha, ha!
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest,
Lead off this ground, and let's make further search
What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!
At nothing can be more. I'll to my book,
But rather lose her to an African,
All wound with adders who with cloven tongues
ACT I
John. A strange fish! Were I in England now,
The manage of my state, as at that time
No, monster, not I.
Aside to SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO
Shalt have the air at freedom: for a little
Spring come to you at the farthest
Beseech you, sir, be merry, you have cause,
[Within]  There's wood enough within.
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound
Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
I cried to dream again.
Let's take leave of him.
Enter ARIEL
And ye that on the sands with printless foot
Are worse than devils.
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Of every creature's best!
By Providence divine.
in it five weeks without changing.
There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:
They wake
When I shall think: or Phoebus' steeds are founder'd,
That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounced
and keep him tame and get to Naples with him, he's a
Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart
Who am myself attach'd with weariness,
I should know that voice: it should be--but he is
know it by thy trembling: now Prosper works upon thee.
Have I done since I went.
And deeper than did ever plummet sound
Had I been any god of power, I would
temperance.
Four or five women once that tended me?
I'll bring you to your ship and so to Naples,
Come, kiss.
hanging: make the rope of his destiny our cable,
Merrily, merrily shall I live now
Yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch:
Than other princesses can that have more time
That's a brave god and bears celestial liquor.
Come on, obey:
The beauty of his daughter, he himself
The spirit torments me, Oh!
should thunder as it did before, I know not
How I may bear me here: my prime request,
He came alive to land.
Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin'd to pile!
And ride upon their backs, he trod the water,
No longer for my flatterer: he is drown'd
I afeard of him! A very weak monster! The man i'
Shortly shall all my labours end, and thou
The name thou owest not, and hast put thyself
That, if I then had waked after long sleep,
But by immortal Providence she's mine:
Hail, many-colour'd messenger, that ne'er
And yet so fast asleep.
Where should this music be? i' the air or the earth?
Play the men.
four legs, for it hath been said, As proper a man as
Exit
What, art thou waking?
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.
How now? moody?
for our own doth little advantage. If he be not
Lingering perdition, worse than any death
Was I then to you!
To come and sport: her peacocks fly amain:
With his own bolt, the strong-based promontory
Most busy lest, when I do it.
Certainly, sir, I can.
My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,
a devil, and no monster: I will leave him, I have no
By what? by any other house or person?
So is the dear'st o' the loss.
Yea, his dread trident shake.
Indian. Legged like a man and his fins like
Could not again undo: it was mine art,
As late I have been, I not know: thy pulse
Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,
I prize above my dukedom.
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
Wound the loud winds, or with bemock'd-at stabs
wisest. He shall taste of my bottle: if he have
This wooden slavery than to suffer
But blessedly holp hither.
was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much
We cannot miss him: he does make our fire,
No, precious creature,
Re-enter Boatswain
That if you now beheld them, your affections
How didst thou 'scape? How camest thou hither?
a harmless fairy, has done little better than
To an unsettled fancy cure thy brains,
not hand a rope more, use your authority: if you
SCENE III. Another part of the island.
No harm.
I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
In this strange stare?
O, out of that 'no hope'
drowned, and these are devils: O defend me!
Loved Mall, Meg and Marian and Margery,
Have I given fire and rifted Jove's stout oak
As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.
hath him, and that soundly.
Mars's hot minion is returned again,
relief, if it be but for that. if I can recover him
And let Sebastian wake.' Say, this were death
He vanishes in thunder, then, to soft music  enter the Shapes again, and dance, with mocks and mows, and carrying out the table
To what tune pleased his ear, that now he was
Should become kings of Naples? O, rejoice
Excellent.
Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance
I have forsworn.
and to detract. If all the wine in my bottle will
wore it? I mean, in a sort.
Go sleep, and hear us.
Not a soul
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead
Have given you here a third of mine own life,
Be not disturb'd with my infirmity:
No, my dear'st love,
Which end o' the beam should bow. We have lost your
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
for the name of king? To cabin: silence! trouble us not.
The dropsy drown this fool I what do you mean
To enter human hearing, from Argier,
The strangeness of this business, at pick'd leisure
water, not a drop before: therefore bear up, and
Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,
not sprites.
Him that you term'd, sir, 'The good old lord Gonzalo,'
Out o' the moon, I do assure thee: I was the man i'
Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish
And then I'll bring thee to the present business
And pardon'd the deceiver, dwell
Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling
Before the time be out? no more!
That's more to me than my wetting: yet this is your
We first put out to sea.
Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep,
They would not take her life. Is not this true?
[Aside]  I had forgot that foul conspiracy
Of two most rare affections! Heavens rain grace
An if this be at all, a most strange story.
Past the mid season.
Has a new master: get a new man.
A daughter?
The old cock.
My Ariel, chick,
Each putter-out of five for one will bring us
An it had not fallen flat-long.
Than we bring men to comfort them:
To the dulling of my spirits: sit down, and rest.
Thou earth, thou! speak.
O king Stephano!
But yet thou shalt have freedom: so, so, so.
dregs of the storm be past.
O, it is monstrous, monstrous:
Drinks
And put it to the foil: but you, O you,
We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.
For breathing in their faces, beat the ground
Dropping upon thy head.
O'er whom I give thee power, here to this place:
This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's
Draw together,
mouth, this will shake your shaking, I can tell you,
What, Ariel! my industrious servant, Ariel!
beyond credit,--
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
A matter from thee, and a birth indeed
Wilt come? I'll follow, Stephano.
Hath caused to belch up you, and on this island
As this Gonzalo, I myself could make
Acknowledge mine.
I have great comfort from this fellow: methinks he
Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me
Now my charms are all o'erthrown,
Would here have kill'd your king, I do forgive thee,
Go make thyself like a nymph o' the sea: be subject
Was I, to take this drunkard for a god
Now I arise:
Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows,
To name the bigger light, and how the less,
In dignity, and for the liberal arts
Juno and Ceres whisper, and send Iris on employment
not a holiday fool there but would give a piece
My brother and thy uncle, call'd Antonio--
By all of us, and the fair soul herself
As great'st does least.
Yea, yea, my lord: I'll yield him thee asleep,
My present fancies.
My mistress show'd me thee and thy dog and thy bush.
Of a whole herd of lions.
To trash for over-topping, new created
It seldom visits sorrow, when it doth,
Solemn and strange music
Home both in word and deed. Most cruelly
perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his
Of these our dear-beloved solemnized,
Without or grudge or grumblings: thou didst promise
Have I made shake and by the spurs pluck'd up
But felt a fever of the mad and play'd
Thou shalt ere long be free.
That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,
Thy banks with pioned and twilled brims,
To work mine end upon their senses that
That you, his friend, are in, and sends me forth--
Unless I be relieved by prayer,
Follow me.
And I thus humble ever.
I'll be thy second.
Out of my way, unless he bid 'em, but
No, as I am a man.
That's most certain.
I do well believe your highness, and
Where should they be set else? he were a brave
And what strength I have's mine own,
First, noble friend,
But only Sycorax my dam and she,
To think these spirits?
Four legs and two voices: a most delicate monster!
Indeed the top of admiration! worth
Spirit,
You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace
Where the quick freshes are.
And they shall be themselves.
The honour of my child.
not drowned. Is the storm overblown? I hid me
And to my state grew stranger, being transported
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers--
Of officer and office, set all hearts i' the state
She loved not the savour of tar nor of pitch,
and by again.
Here in this island we arrived, and here
hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil
Do that good mischief which may make this island
The ground indeed is tawny.
Where man doth not inhabit, you 'mongst men
They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk,
For yet ere supper-time must I perform
Then let us both be sudden.
His word is more than the miraculous harp, he hath
Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
That works him strongly.
For still 'tis beating in my mind, your reason
Sweet, now, silence!
Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,
present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's leather.
Dash'd all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
A most high miracle!
I'll come by Naples. Draw thy sword: one stroke
Let your indulgence set me free.
All exercise on thee, thou shalt be pinch'd
One word more, I charge thee
Besides yourself, to like of. But I prattle
Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
reason. Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.
Silence! one word more
Must by us both be spent most preciously.
Rather than want a spirit: appear and pertly!
Arise, and say how thou camest here.
Enter JUNO
I am woe for't, sir.
Exit
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
how does thine ague?
Thou liest, thou canst not.
The visitor will not give him o'er so.
put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of
Lie at my mercy all mine enemies:
Though the seas threaten, they are merciful,
The fraughting souls within her.
Hereditary sloth instructs me.
You and your ways, whose wraths to guard you from--
A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!
Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art?
Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis,
That beasts shall tremble at thy din.
There, sir, stop:
Ay, and this.
Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in's tale, by
Dove-drawn with her. Here thought they to have done
The pine and cedar: graves at my command
Preserve the king.
No.
No wonder, sir,
An advocate for an imposter! hush!
and it shall be said so again while Stephano
Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, GONZALO, ADRIAN, FRANCISCO, and others
Set Caliban and his companions free,
Thunder
Sea-water shalt thou drink, thy food shall be
Something too wildly and my father's precepts
Their clearer reason. O good Gonzalo,
strange bed-fellows. I will here shroud till the
Why
I should report this now, would they believe me?
Will't please you taste of what is here?
Methought the billows spoke and told me of it,
And think of each thing well.
Of any thing the image tell me that
Will be here with mop and mow.
Having first seized his books, or with a log
Yet with my nobler reason 'gaitist my fury
Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custom with him,
Another way so high a hope that even
which will give language to you, cat: open your
It sounds no more: and sure, it waits upon
board 'em. Servant-monster, drink to me.
Enter MIRANDA, and PROSPERO at a distance, unseen
Where the bee sucks. there suck I:
Summon'd me hither, to this short-grass'd green?
At this encounter do so much admire
What? I say,
I shaked you, sir, and cried: as mine eyes open'd,
For stale to catch these thieves.
Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff
She said thou wast my daughter, and thy father
The mariners all under hatches stow'd,
'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
And use of service, none, contract, succession,
This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture
Why, how now? ho, awake! Why are you drawn?
Believe things certain. Welcome, my friends all!
No occupation, all men idle, all,
Lays down his mantle
Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
How sharp the point of this remembrance is!--
of thunder and lightning heard.
my bones: I shall not fear fly-blowing.
Do so: to ebb
Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls
Can lay to bed for ever, whiles you, doing thus,
Then, tell me,
Give me thy hand: I am sorry I beat thee, but,
Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.
The union of your bed with weeds so loathly
They have changed eyes. Delicate Ariel,
And crown what I profess with kind event
Then say if they be true. This mis-shapen knave,
Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet, note,
Now does my project gather to a head:
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
To take my life. Two of these fellows you
Here's neither bush nor shrub, to bear off
I'll fetch them, sir.
thing. The wills above be done! but I would fain
Or that for which I live, who once again
O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed!
I have inly wept,
Into something rich and strange.
Professes to persuade,--the king his son's alive,
The edge of that day's celebration
They have bereft, and do pronounce by me:
yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of
All three of them are desperate: their great guilt,
I' the name of something holy, sir, why stand you
Unnatural though thou art. Their understanding
Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience
Of homage and I know not how much tribute,
Within this half hour will he be asleep:
Thy nerves are in their infancy again
And make it halt behind her.
Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not
I drink the air before me, and return
It struck mine ear most terribly.
As my soul prompts it. Spirit, fine spirit! I'll free thee
So perfect and so peerless, are created
[Aside to ANTONIO]  I say, to-night: no more.
Is to make midnight mushrooms, that rejoice
Makes this place Paradise.
I'll fish for thee and get thee wood enough.
Is so possess'd with guilt: come from thy ward,
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
And there repose: a turn or two I'll walk,
of your daughter, who is now queen.
Was Duke of Milan, and thou his only heir
[Aside to PROSPERO]  Sir, all this service
Drop on you both! a south-west blow on ye
fit. If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will
And that you will some good instruction give
By help of her more potent ministers
Enter certain Nymphs
To feed my innocent people.
forth more islands.
This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother,
Dull thing, I say so, he, that Caliban
But are they, Ariel, safe?
Revenge it on him,--for I know thou darest,
Water with berries in't, and teach me how
I must eat my dinner.
None, man, all idle: whores and knaves.
Here PROSPERO discovers FERDINAND and MIRANDA playing at chess
Admired Miranda!
The clouds methought would open and show riches
In what thou hadst to say: so, with good life
Thy case, dear friend,
To run upon the sharp wind of the north,
This will I tell my master.
Your swords are now too massy for your strengths
A cry within
Were I but where 'tis spoken.
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep--die, rather, wink'st
In country footing.
Enter ARIEL, invisible
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
Or stole it, rather.
Done. The wager?
And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife
For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.
Widow! a pox o' that! How came that widow in?
I' the commonwealth I would by contraries
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Any companion in the world but you,
It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
Thou makest me merry, I am full of pleasure:
But, as 'tis,
Or else new form'd 'em, having both the key
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none,
For more assurance that a living prince
Where but even now with strange and several noises
In virtue than in vengeance: they being penitent,
Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas
For he is, sure, i' the island.
Mine would, sir, were I human.
As bondage e'er of freedom: here's my hand.
as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage
But what my power might else exact, like one
What is't? a spirit?
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child
All's hush'd as midnight yet.
Were but my trials of thy love and thou
Dost thou forget
Then meet and join. Jove's lightnings, the precursors
To have no screen between this part he play'd
If thou be'st Prospero,
More widows in them of this business' making
And that most deeply to consider is
When he comes back, you demi-puppets that
How thou camest here thou mayst.
And were the king on't, what would I do?
A dozen years, within which space she died
Being lass-lorn: thy pole-clipt vineyard,
Answer your summons, Juno does command:
I'll fight their legions o'er.
but an islander, that hath lately suffered by a
Poor worm, thou art infected!
Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
If not, I'll die your maid: to be your fellow
All sleep except ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO
O brave monster! Lead the way.
From Milan did supplant good Prospero,
If thou beest Trinculo, come forth: I'll pull thee
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
Exit ARIEL
Have I in such a prison.
From me he got it. if thy greatness will
With foreheads villanous low.
As fast as mill-wheels strike. Then was this island--
I here abjure, and, when I have required
With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
Prithee, do not turn me about, my stomach is not constant.
O, if a virgin,
For our case is as theirs.
Is common, every day some sailor's wife,
Abates the ardour of my liver.
Will make me sleep again: and then, in dreaming,
Most often do so near the bottom run
If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness:
Be not afraid: I met her deity
Aside
Be free, and fare thou well! Please you, draw near.
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
If this might be a brother.
To think o' the teen that I have turn'd you to,
Do not torment me, prithee, I'll bring my wood home faster.
Thou art inclined to sleep, 'tis a good dulness,
As great to me as late, and, supportable
Let it alone, thou fool, it is but trash.
A goodly person: he hath lost his fellows
You said our work should cease.
yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to the
The fault's your own.
What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee?
I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand,
There is not only disgrace and dishonour in that,
Was dukedom large enough: of temporal royalties
Of the salt deep,
As much as me my dukedom.
He receives comfort like cold porridge.
And bring thee forth brave brood.
That he's undrown'd.
No sovereignty,--
Like bulls, or rather lions: did't not wake you?
Will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices
From me, the lord on't.
Since I have my dukedom got
Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
Rich garments, linens, stuffs and necessaries,
Hear a little further
As you from crimes would pardon'd be,
duck, I'll be sworn.
Upon mine honour, sir, I heard a humming,
Save, from my glass, mine own, nor have I seen
I mean our preservation, few in millions
Even in a dream, were we divided from them
How came we ashore?
Must rectify our knowledge.
I ever saw so noble.
Now come, my Ariel! bring a corollary,
My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore,
Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts!
Which now's upon's, without the which this story
Temperance was a delicate wench.
Re-enter ARIEL, invisible
let no man take care for himself, for all is
Who, with a charm join'd to their suffer'd labour,
Under the hatches, the master and the boatswain
Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me
If Venus or her son, as thou dost know,
sack as I to-day? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie,
Yields us kind answer.
A prince, Miranda, I do think, a king,
I saw him beat the surges under him,
I should have been a sore one then.
interrupt the monster one word further, and,
Exeunt
state totters.
And I'll be sworn 'tis true: travellers ne'er did
monster, but an infinite loss.
So fun of valour that they smote the air
Nothing of him that doth fade
He's in his fit now and does not talk after the
wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this
Lead, monster, we'll follow. I would I could see
Which thou takest from me. When thou camest first,
Weeps when she sees me work, and says, such baseness
To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker
For my poor son.
And were brought moping hither.
Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
As they smelt music: so I charm'd their ears
You the like loss!
And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
This fellow could not drown. Now, blasphemy,
I am skilless of, but, by my modesty,
When you should bring the plaster.
Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,
Come hither from the furrow and be merry:
But ever see that man!
Thou hast. Where was she born? speak, tell me.
I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow,
and drown? Have you a mind to sink?
My charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time
What shall I do? say what, what shall I do?
And 'twixt the green sea and the azured vault
could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off
To excel the golden age.
You do look, my son, in a moved sort,
Beats TRINCULO
You sunburnt sicklemen, of August weary,
I'll deliver all,
I'm out of patience.
Canst thou bring me to the party?
Do I take part: the rarer action is
So, king, go safely on to seek thy son.
Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee?
Thus, sir:
he smells like a fish, a very ancient and fish-
Which was to please. Now I want
The sun will set before I shall discharge
Their proper selves.
And his brave son being twain.
But one fiend at a time,
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
me asleep, for I am very heavy?
With all the honours on my brother: whereon,
I prithee,
A contract of true love to celebrate,
You taught me but while-ere?
To do me business in the veins o' the earth
Thought is free.
Ha, ha, ha!
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report
On the blest lovers.
Mark but the badges of these men, my lords,
Where is the master, boatswain?
Lo, now, lo!
Goes upright with his carriage. How's the day?
As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest
this tabourer, he lays it on.
To hear the solemn curfew, by whose aid,
He's gone.
Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master?
I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have
Exeunt FERDINAND and MIRANDA severally
But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
[Aside to ARIEL]  Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.
And,--do you mark me, sir?
I'll drown my book.
hair and prove a bald jerkin.
Exit
These are not natural events, they strengthen
But she as far surpasseth Sycorax
Well demanded, wench:
Since I came to this isle: and in the morn
His time doth take.
Be rough and razorable, she that--from whom?
Put off that gown, Trinculo, by this hand, I'll have
Exeunt
Although my last: no matter, since I feel
This is a most majestic vision, and
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
Which is most faint: now, 'tis true,
By my so potent art. But this rough magic
To FERDINAND
Letters should not be known, riches, poverty,
ACT IV
The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place and fertile:
salt water.
sea-side where my wine is hid. How now, moon-calf!
And then take hands:
As well as he that sleeps, lords that can prate
May know if you remain upon this island,
And women too, but innocent and pure,
Flout 'em and scout 'em
Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
From strange to stranger. Say, how came you hither?
Is it so brave a lass?
What, must our mouths be cold?
Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?
Yet,--
Expell'd remorse and nature, who, with Sebastian,
For else his project dies--to keep them living.
And blister you all o'er!
At requiring,
Look thou be true, do not give dalliance
Enter ARIEL
He will chastise me.
You, brother mine, that entertain'd ambition,
To snare the nimble marmoset, I'll bring thee
Thou wert but a lost monster.
Draws, and is charmed from moving
My affections
We were awaked, straightway, at liberty,
Thou know'st, was banish'd: for one thing she did
Exit
That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them
What's the matter?
Would not infect his reason?
'Twould put me to my slipper: but I feel not
Perchance he will not mind me.
From mine own library with volumes that
To the fire i' the blood: be more abstemious,
With an eye of green in't.
I do, and surely
What is the time o' the day?
Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
No, pray thee.
Out of the dukedom and confer fair Milan
Hast thou not dropp'd from heaven?
O the heavens!
It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit.
Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot
He'll be hang'd yet,
You look wearily.
Do not torment me: Oh!
Hast strangely stood the test here, afore Heaven,
Through forth-rights and meanders! By your patience,
As I was sometime Milan: quickly, spirit,
Great Juno, comes, I know her by her gait.
Imprison'd thou didst painfully remain
Trebles thee o'er.
I do not love to look on.
With colours fairer painted their foul ends.
I shall no more to sea, to sea,
thunderbolt.
Ay, lord, she will become thy bed, I warrant.
What great hope have you! no hope that way is
Follow, and do me service.
And Trinculo is reeling ripe: where should they
Ariel, thy charge
My lord Sebastian,
To most ignoble stooping.
And will not be uplifted. But remember--
I am more serious than my custom: you
An undergoing stomach, to bear up
Soft, sir! one word more.
What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
As dreams are made on, and our little life
My liberty.
Him and his innocent child: for which foul deed
A howling monster: a drunken monster!
Whereof what's past is prologue, what to come
Who shall be of as little memory
All things in common nature should produce
Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know'st
Not since widow Dido's time.
With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
That they devour their reason and scarce think
Which brought us hither.
And strays about to find 'em.
Prithee, peace.
[Aside to ANTONIO]  The next advantage
Cursed be I that did so! All the charms
Every man shift for all the rest, and
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
The best is past. Brother, my lord the duke,
by and by it will strike.
Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.
O most dear mistress,
And he's composed of harshness. I must remove
Where she at least is banish'd from your eye,
Marry, will I	kneel and repeat it, I will stand,
I am a fool
Or blessed was't we did?
By inch-meal a disease! His spirits hear me
To make an earthquake! sure, it was the roar
Do, do: we steal by line and level, an't like your grace.
Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld
You more invest it! Ebbing men, indeed,
Inhabits here: some heavenly power guide us
Befitting this first meeting. Welcome, sir,
Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink. Sit down,
Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it,
Nor lead me, like a firebrand, in the dark
Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your
Thy grace shall have it.
And honour'd in their issue.
There's something else to do: hush, and be mute,
I long
To fall it on Gonzalo.
'Ban, 'Ban, Cacaliban
And--how we know not--all clapp'd under hatches,
away where my hogshead of wine is, or I'll turn you
To FERDINAND
And his great person perish.
So dry he was for sway--wi' the King of Naples
Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter,
CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO, are driven out
And him he play'd it for, he needs will be
And some donation freely to estate
Hag-seed, hence!
[Aside]  The devil speaks in him.
Ye all which it inherit, shall dissolve
Good my lord, give me thy favour still.
The pine and let thee out.
which my nose is in great indignation.
Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
In the dark backward and abysm of time?
To answer other business. Shrug'st thou, malice?
Resumes his mantle
For aye thy foot-licker.
To weep at what I am glad of.
And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon
On those that are, revenges: crimes, like lands,
They sit
trumpet's sound, we shall to 't presently.
Do what they would, are sorry--you are honourable,--
If thou couldst please me with speaking to me, thou
Did you see my cap?
loves, and, I am proud, say, that my occasions have
You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies,
With senators on the bench: this is it
As full as thy report?
You must consider that a prodigal course
no less esteemed.
And able horses. No porter at his gate,
Jeweller: We'll bear, with your lordship.
A poor unmanly melancholy sprung
Return so much, I have shook my head and wept,
Then there's my glove,
have you that charitable title from thousands, did
Hadst thou, like us from our first swath, proceeded
I have sweat to see his honour. My honoured lord,--
it will be seen to-morrow: my long sickness
and free him.
ne'er flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of
The like to you kind Varro.
Doubt it not, worthy lord.
O, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, in that.
Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree
TIMON comes from his cave
I prithee, but repair to me next morning.
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
Thy mother's of my generation: what's she, if I be a dog?
But find supply immediate. Get you gone:
Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice--
thou sawest me not. Fare thee well.
Mine, fifty talents.
Surprise me to the very brink of tears:
Let me behold thy face. Surely, this man
Lie in a pitch'd field.
Yes.
Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.
Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
art hanged. This is to Lord Timon, this to
Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,
I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,
What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
Stay not, all's in vain.
O, that men's ears should be
Lucius!
And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,
But direct villany. Therefore, be abhorr'd
Beast!
Rascals should have 't. Do not assume my likeness.
'Tis most nobly spoken.
The beggar native honour.
On thy low grave, on faults forgiven. Dead
[Aside]  Must thou needs stand for a villain in
Suspect still comes where an estate is least.
In hollow bones of man, strike their sharp shins,
Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,
Touches his friend, which craves to be remember'd
with so many talents.
'Tis common:
When man's worst sin is, he does too much good!
Thus would I eat it.
Of knaves once more, my cook and I'll provide.
And all out of an empty coffer:
All, sirrah, all:
Throwing the water in their faces
Then thou liest: look in thy last work, where thou
And strain what other means is left unto us
What, do we meet together?
That mightily deceives you.
Pluck the grave wrinkled senate from the bench,
From change of fortune. Why this spade? this place?
And he that's once denied will hardly speed.
In different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.
Men daily find it. Get thee away, and take
That ever govern'd man.
Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription of
Worse than the worst, content.
La, la, la, la! 'nothing doubting,' says he? Alas,
Will o'er some high-viced city hang his poison
I beseech your honour,
Let it flow this way, my good lord.
His discontents are unremoveably
Which aptly sings the good.'
Should yet be hungry! Common mother, thou,
this from me, I count it one of my greatest
Indifferent.
What have you now to present unto him?
nothing are they welcome.
Shame that they wanted cunning, in excess
The gods confound--hear me, you good gods all--
In qualities of the best. This man of thine
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself,
I tell you, denied, my lord.
Attempts her love: I prithee, noble lord,
There's nothing level in our cursed natures,
Time to be honest.
Hearing you were retired, your friends fall'n off,
Have travail'd in the great shower of your gifts,
We are so virtuously bound--
May it please your honour, my lord hath sent--
Our sufferance vainly: now the time is flush,
amiss in them, you gods, make suitable for
His fellowship i' the cause against your city,
us, and is very likely to load our purposes with
him from't.
warrant. Why, this hits right, I dreamt of a silver
How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?
Upon my soul,'tis true, sir.
Why?
Look out, and speak to friends: the Athenians,
Exeunt
What's to be thought of him? does the rumour hold
Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield
At duty, more than I could frame employment,
Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged thyself
ne'er have use for 'em, and would most resemble
Can you eat roots, and drink cold water? no.
not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told
Being of no power to make his wishes good:
Do we, my lord?
What, my lord! dispraise?
Ha, you gods! why this? what this, you gods? Why, this
We cannot take this for answer, sir.
He's but a mad lord, and nought but humour sways him.
hazard thy life for thy dinner: wert thou the
Prithee, no more.
next him now, parts bread with him, pledges the
Enter a Second Servant
He forfeits his own blood that spills another.
And slain in fight many of your enemies:
Thou wast born to conquer my country.
Were not erected by their hands from whom
Supported his estate, nay, Timon's money
May have the world in empire!
Enter ALCIBIADES, with the rest
Make use of thy salt hours: season the slaves
Of monstrous friends, nor has he with him to
If his occasion were not virtuous,
O, by no means,
With those five talents.
And I have bred her at my dearest cost
hast feigned him a worthy fellow.
politic love.
Approach the fold and cull the infected forth,
'Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir, which, in my
A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.
And ne'er be weary. Alcibiades,
But set them down horrible traitors: spare not the babe,
Each bound it chafes. What have you there?
gentleman, Lord Lucullus, entreats your company
That is one may reach deep enough, and yet
sometime like a lawyer, sometime like a philosopher,
Walks, like contempt, alone. More of our fellows.
he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.
He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum,
Ay, Timon.
commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very
My lord, we always have confess'd it.
Most rich in Timon's nod.
Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
Prescribe to other as each other's leech.
Well, would I were gently put out of office
Dost hate a medlar?
Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy,
Enter an old Athenian
beguile thee, if thou wert the lamb, the fox would
FLAMINIUS waiting. Enter a Servant to him
It comes in charity to thee: for all thy living
How now, philosopher!
bountiful gentleman: but thou art wise, and thou
Why, Apemantus?
Do you dare our anger?
I know thee well,
Call me to your remembrances.
At Lacedaemon and Byzantium
Ay, my good lord: five talents is his debt,
Push! did you see my cap?
Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?
What time o' day is't, Apemantus?
The senators with one consent of love
Can justly praise but what he does affect:
Re-enter FLAVIUS, with the casket
To entertain me as your steward still.
And, in some sort, these wants of mine are crown'd,
And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow
Ay, marry, what of these?
Athens is become a forest of beasts.
Were a sufficient briber for his life.
To every purpose! O thou touch of hearts!
Enter Poet, Painter, Jeweller, Merchant, and others, at several doors
And that unaptness made your minister,
Are prized by their masters: believe't, dear lord,
Thou counterfeit'st most lively.
From whence 'tis nourish'd: the fire i' the flint
Enter TIMON, ALCIBIADES, and Lords,  and c
This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,
I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return,
Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,
Good day, sir.
Upon whose age we void it up again,
thou art a man!
And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,
If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.
summer-birds are men. Gentlemen, our dinner will not
There were no suns to borrow of.
Here, my lord, in readiness.
Sound to this coward and lascivious town
Exeunt
When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
From our companion thrown into his grave,
Here's my lord.
And morsels unctuous, greases his pure mind,
attain to! If thou wert the lion, the fox would
O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us!
Till now you have gone on and fill'd the time
the lip of his mistress: your diet shall be in all
beat it out of my hat: did you see my jewel?
My heart is ever at your service, my lord.
I pray, let them be admitted.
Is noble Timon: of whose memory
SCENE III. Woods and cave, near the seashore.
But what particular rarity? what strange,
The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the
that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without
Is every flatterer's spirit. Who can call him
Enter a third Servant
Exit
Fare thee well, fare thee well.
I would have put my wealth into donation,
Out of mine own, his days and times are past
But thieves do lose it: steal no less for this
My honest grief unto him, and, as my lord,
And not endure all threats? sleep upon't,
What! a knave too?
O, let me stay,
So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again,
Supply his life, or that which can command it.
Bring us to his cave:
No care, no stop! so senseless of expense,
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!--
Not by his breath that is more miserable.
greediness would afflict thee, and oft thou shouldst
Timon will to the woods, where he shall find
Most hungerly on your sight.
Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?
I prithee, beat thy drum, and get thee gone.
How!
To hold your hand more close: I did endure
How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the city?
Magic of bounty! all these spirits thy power
Go.
As if he had but proved an argument.
For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.
In part for his sake moved.
Rotten humidity, below thy sister's orb
that then thou mightst kill 'em and bid me to 'em!
Into a great estate: when he was poor,
His promises fly so beyond his state
And kept his credit with his purse,
thorough them.
Instruction, manners, mysteries, and trades,
Which all men speak with him.
That's a deed thou'lt die for.
I cannot think but your age has forgot me,
Let our drums strike.
Dead, sure, and this his grave. What's on this tomb
Exeunt
Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS
The swallow follows not summer more willing than we
For those that were, it is not square to take
Pays interest for 't, his land's put to their books.
Most thankfully, my lord.
not here thy gait.'
the flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!
die a bawd.
My knowing, Timon has been this lord's father,
Enter PHILOTUS
Than hew to't with thy sword.
You only speak from your distracted soul,
My lord, you take us even at the best.
Cap and knee slaves, vapours, and minute-jacks!
Will put thy shirt on warm? will these moss'd trees,
Aside, aside, here comes Lord Timon.
thou wouldst sin the faster. Thou givest so long,
To Lacedaemon did my land extend.
Slave!
There's much example for't, the fellow that sits
Scorn'dst our brain's flow and those our
To bring manslaughter into form and set quarrelling
That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
For you serve knaves.
Sevenfold above itself, no gift to him,
Exit
For, by oppressing and betraying me,
Whither art going?
Lie where the light foam the sea may beat
My dear lord,--
[To LUCILIUS]           Love you the maid?
Derive some pain from you: plague all,
Laid them before you, you would throw them off,
our spirit,
And not believes himself: down with the nose,
Have seal'd thy full desire.
Lord Timon's?
My lord, there are certain nobles of the senate
forget their faults, I drink to you.
Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to
O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you:
The gilded newt and eyeless venom'd worm,
Lucilius' Servant	                  Welcome, good brother.
Therefore, Timon,--
And let the foes quietly cut their throats,
Confound them by some course, and come to me,
Ever to read them thine.
To overcome him: in that beastly fury
Right welcome, sir!
Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth
I'll beat thee, but I should infect my hands.
sworn not to give regard to you. Farewell, and come
Why dost thou call them knaves? thou know'st them not.
men, and remain a beast with the beasts?
He goes away in a cloud: call him, call him.
Would thou wouldst burst!
therefore welcome: I myself would have no power,
May these add to the number that may scald thee!
You would not hear me,
keep so good a house. Many a time and often I ha'
That there should be small love 'mongst these
Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in
Here, take: the gods out of my misery
Of what is to continue: never mind
Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?
Good words the other day of a bay courser
It wears, sir, as it grows.
Toward thee forgetfulness too general, gross:
Be crown'd with plagues that thee alone obey!
Most true, he does.
company light upon thee! I will fear to catch it
Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
I will say of it,
Every man here's so. What would he have borrowed of
You mend the jewel by the wearing it.
Good day at once.
I'll have it so. My steward!
To be in anger is impiety,
Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her,
But nakedness, thou detestable town!
All of companionship.
Moves in this lip! to the dumbness of the gesture
Expecting in return twenty for one?
I, that I am one now:
Show me this piece. I am joyful of your sights.
SCENE II. A banqueting-room in Timon's house.
ruffians bald,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.
I should fear those that dance before me now
We banish thee for ever.
What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast,
But Timon's silver treads upon his lip,
I will not kiss thee, then the rot returns
Honest Ventidius, you mistake my love:
Exeunt APEMANTUS and Fool
Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time
Thou art true and honest, ingeniously I speak.
music awhile, if they will fare so harshly o' the
SCENE II. A public place.
But let the famish'd flesh slide from the bone,
At heaviest answer.
Lucilius' Servant	Not yet.
Live with authority: so soon we shall drive back
My master is awaked by great occasion
Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answer
O, sir, let it not trouble you.
'Commend me to your master'--and the cap
Nothing at this time but my visitation: only I will
Go to Ventidius.
They are fairly welcome.
You may take my word, my lord, I know, no man
How this lord is follow'd!
Have uncheque'd theft. Love not yourselves: away,
Hath stepp'd into the law, which is past depth
Come away.
go away merry, but they enter my mistress' house
Offering the fortunes of his former days,
Can found his state in safety. Caphis, ho!
have spoke the least:
Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brain'd war,
Eating a root
This and my food are equals, there's no odds:
SCENE I. A Senator's house.
As thieves to keepers.
But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them,--
Amen. So fall to't:
Give me breath.
Enter ALCIBIADES, with Attendants
praised: but reserve still to give, lest your
Live loathed and long,
It hath pleased the gods to remember my father's age,
fortunes! O joy, e'en made away ere 't can be born!
Come hither: pray you,
And may diseases lick up their false bloods!
Beats them out, and then retires to his cave
I am ashamed on't. Denied that honourable man!
Do thy right nature.
wilt not promise, the gods plague thee, for thou art
Here's gold. Go, suck the subtle blood o' the grape,
The Senators descend, and open the gates
That the whole life of Athens were in this!
That's well spoke.
Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream
Present approach.
I charge thee, invite them all: let in the tide
'We have seen better days.' Let each take some,
And all this courtesy! The strain of man's bred out
If 'twill not serve,'tis not so base as you,
To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!
It turns in less than two nights? O you gods,
There's not a whittle in the unruly camp
A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.
solidares for thee: good boy, wink at me, and say
Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?
your lordship.
Here is some gold for thee.
None, but to
good to thee.
Exit
And make a clear way to the gods.
observe, I give thee warning on't.
Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,
take't of my soul, my lord leans wondrously to
Creditors? devils!
So, so, there!
and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his,
In giving him his right.
True, for he bears it not about him, 'tis hid.
for ever perfect.
You that way and you this, but two in company,
and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning
Into baboon and monkey.
A moderate table.
to put off, but he hath conjured me beyond them, and
He does deny him, in respect of his,
With all my heart, gentlemen both, and how fare you?
A fool of thee: depart.
Is rank'd with all deserts, all kind of natures,
That Timon cares not. But if be sack fair Athens,
If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
Jeweller:	If he will touch the estimate: but, for that--
Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.
I'll hunt with him, and let them be received,
Lives in these touches, livelier than life.
That never knew but better, is some burden:
Call me before the exactest auditors
By humble message and by promised means:
For which I wait for money.
I derived liberty.
Whose thankless natures--O abhorred spirits!--
Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
Ours is the fall, I fear, our foes the snare.
let's ha' some sport with 'em.
To the great lord.
prithee, let my meat make thee silent.
sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my
Art not thou a merchant?
That from it all consideration slips!
Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.
Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each
Here, at your lordship's service.
Of present dues: the future comes apace:
Domestic awe, night-rest, and neighbourhood,
Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.
Choler does kill me that thou art alive,
Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
inviting, which many my near occasions did urge me
That with your other noble parts you'll suit
he's but a filthy piece of work.
I shall accept them fairly, let the presents
The worst that man can breathe, and make his wrongs
thankfulness. For your own gifts, make yourselves
What's that?
SCENE III. The woods. Timon's cave, and a rude tomb seen.
And cut your trusters' throats! bound servants, steal!
What are we, Apemantus?
With burthens of the dead,--some that were hang'd,
Dost please thyself in't?
woman, sometime the philosopher.
Away! what art thou?
It must not bear my daughter.
praised the vile,
If I would broach the vessels of my love,
Rather than render back, out with your knives,
Retires to his cave
requests to thy friend.
He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus,
Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads:
And send for money for 'em.
He is but outside: these pencill'd figures are
There is not so much left, to furnish out
godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the
To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust,
Your potent and infectious fevers heap
Abroad? why then, women are more valiant
But thorough lust and laughter. Pity's sleeping:
To build his fortune I will strain a little,
His outsides, to wear them like his raiment,
other hour, I should derive much from't, for,
On whom I may confer what I have got:
They never flatter'd thee: what hast thou given?
That death in me at others' lives may laugh.
To Painter
To make it known to us.
To FLAVIUS
I am of your fear for that.
Then I know thee not:
I have retired me to a wasteful cock,
Out of his free love, hath presented to you
Men are not still the same: 'twas time and griefs
You cannot make gross sins look clear:
That answer might have become Apemantus.
Must it be so? it must not be. My lords,
No.
If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
Vouchsafe me a word, it does concern you near.
well. Those healths will make thee and thy state
furnish him, nothing doubting your present
leopard: wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to
Like empty purses pick'd, and his poor self,
That I account them blessings, for by these
Well fare you, gentleman: give me your hand,
And pursy insolence shall break his wind
Be a whore still: they love thee not that use thee,
thou a bear, thou wouldst be killed by the horse:
With poisonous spite and envy.
And rich: here is a water, look ye.
And cherish factions: 'tis inferr'd to us,
No, my good lord, he speaks the common tongue,
Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug
If our betters play at that game, we must not dare
Why, fare thee well:
You're a dog.
If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some
wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft:
Not all thy counsel.
Why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills,
every tongue,
Take thou that too, with multiplying bans!
Enter FLAMINIUS, SERVILIUS, and other Servants
Save thee, Timon.
Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown,
Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,
Uncover, dogs, and lap.
thou already, that seest not thy loss in
No richer in return.
How! what does his cashiered worship mutter?
Commend me to him: I will send his ransom,
And ditches grave you all!
Good! gramercy.
Get on your cloak, and haste you to Lord Timon,
Some better than his value, on the moment
Whereon Hyperion's quickening fire doth shine,
I pray for no man but myself:
What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
The knee before him, and returns in peace
As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.
When, for some trifling present, you have bid me
With one man beckon'd from the rest below,
Thrive, give him over: must I take the cure upon me?
I have one word to say to you: look you, my good lord,
See, by good hap, yonder's my lord,
together with the common lag of people--what is
There will little learning die then, that day thou
Exeunt
As slept within the shadow of your power
When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
Translates his rivals.
A parley sounded
And how does that honourable, complete, free-hearted
SCENE I. Without the walls of Athens.
'Tis conceived to scope.
Are you three usurers' men?
And by the hazard of the spotted die
caitiffs left!
Noble and young,
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
Our captain hath in every figure skill,
look ill, Timon. Here's that which is too weak to
And not as our confusion, all thy powers
Keep in your bosom: yet remain assured
What a coil's here!
So is theirs and ours.
For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.
Bloody, 'tis necessary he should die:
like 'em: I could wish my best friend at such a feast.
Even such as they give out. I like your work,
Shall pierce a jot. There's gold to pay soldiers:
Ventidius lately
My Alcibiades. With me? what is your will?
I take no heed of thee, thou'rt an Athenian,
What do you think the hour?
The immortal gods that hear you,--spare your oaths,
Or a dog, that seems a-sleeping:
Only in bone, that none may look on you!
But even the mere necessities upon 't.
Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' the ass.
Where should he have this gold? It is some poor
E'en so, sir, as I say. And, for thy fiction,
You take much pains to mend.
Mistake my fortunes, I am wealthy in my friends.
But, in defence, by mercy, 'tis most just.
To imitate them, faults that are rich are fair.
Come, sermon me no further:
For policy sits above conscience.
For he is set so only to himself
How now?
Digging
But yet I'll bury thee: thou'lt go, strong thief,
Ask nothing, give it him, it foals me, straight,
Ne'er did poor steward wear a truer grief
For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
Are we undone? cast off? nothing remaining?
Why me, Timon?
Your lord sends now for money.
But not till I am dead. I'll say thou'st gold:
Fie, no, do not believe it, he cannot want for money.
Humbly I thank your lordship: never may
Your lordship ever binds him.
think but, in the end, the villainies of man will
Good as the best. Promising is the very air o' the
The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
Honour, health, and compassion to the senate!
These well express in thee thy latter spirits:
I swound to see thee.
Ye're honest men: ye've heard that I have gold,
Is smooth'd by that below: the learned pate
I have told my lord of you, he is coming down to you.
Asses.
deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is
Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
I thank them, and would send them back the plague,
Ha! what has he sent? I am so much endeared to
Thou tedious rogue! I am sorry I shall lose
pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire,
Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon!
Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.
The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
Believe 't, my lord and I have made an end,
Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves
Let us make the assay upon him: if he care not
That he's a made-up villain.
Name them, my lord, let's know them.
Whose star-like nobleness gave life and influence
Infect the air! Twinn'd brothers of one womb,
How fain would I have hated all mankind!
givest me,
To the Fool
Herself's a bawd: let not the virgin's cheek
To them to use your signet and your name,
To whom 'tis instant due. Ne'er speak, or think,
Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
sounds to themselves. Why, I have often wished
Wrong right, base noble, old young, coward valiant.
Allow'd with absolute power and thy good name
Ay, Apemantus.
And, if it be so far beyond his health,
Find little.
SCENE V. The same. The senate-house. The Senate sitting.
When all our offices have been oppress'd
if she be mated with an equal husband?
Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.
transformation!
And her pale fire she snatches from the sun:
In pity of our aged and our youth,
Lucilius' Servant	Ay, but this answer will not serve.
So infinitely endear'd--
Yet our old love made a particular force,
By that which has undone thee: hinge thy knee,
Be't not in thy care, go,
Into our city with thy banners spread:
Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment!
With thy most operant poison! What is here?
the lion and the spots of thy kindred were jurors on
Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants
Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.
How goes our reckoning?
Ay.
The moon into salt tears: the earth's a thief,
He wrought better that made the painter, and yet
Raise me this beggar, and deny 't that lord,
What wouldst do then, Apemantus?
All covered dishes!
Drowns him, and takes his valour prisoner:
make thine own self the conquest of thy fury: wert
I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness:
O my friends,
Mine honest friend,
By putting on the cunning of a carper.
Down with it flat, take the bridge quite away
'Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their caps
There's never a one of you but trusts a knave,
To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen
He's a sworn rioter: he has a sin that often
I say, my lords, he has done fair service,
And the detention of long-since-due debts,
Varro's
Now to guard sure their master.
Right, if doing nothing be death by the law.
us, not to have us thrive in our mystery.
Slink all away, leave their false vows with him,
Look, who comes here: will you be chid?
Where my stomach finds meat, or, rather, where I eat
unicorn, pride and wrath would confound thee and
Might we but have that happiness, my lord, that you
I feel master's passion! this slave,
My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.
That mine own use invites me to cut down,
He dies.
Be worthily entertain'd.
I have a tree, which grows here in my close,
Else, surely, his had equall'd.
The best of happiness,
Whose procreation, residence, and birth,
With his disease of all-shunn'd poverty,
How! have they denied him?
O, 'tis a worthy lord.
The senator shall bear contempt hereditary,
Exit
Enter two Servants of Varro, and the Servant of  LUCIUS, meeting TITUS, HORTENSIUS, and other Servants of TIMON's creditors, waiting his coming out
Voiced so regardfully?
Though you hear now, too late--yet now's a time--
Varro's
He has made too much plenty with 'em,
If there were no foes, that were enough
Exit
I'll trust to your conditions: be whores still,
Lucilius' Servant	So much?
Of Alcibiades the approaches wild,
Enter certain Senators, and pass over
Flow this way! A brave fellow! he keeps his tides
Exit
Either in hope or present, I'ld exchange
properer can we can our own than the riches of our
Thus to excuse yourself.
befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him?
What things in the world canst thou nearest compare
On height of our displeasure: friend or brother,
Pray you, walk near: I'll speak with you anon.
And shakes his threatening sword
Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends,
Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?
That you ask me what you are, and do not know
there was very little honour showed in't. For my own
Than my fortunes to me.
Look you, here comes my mistress' page.
so many talents, nay, urged extremely for't and
Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon!
The banquet brought in
Exit Servant
I must needs say you have a little fault:
A more satiety of commendations.
No, thou stand'st single, thou'rt not on him yet.
Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay
So the were bleeding-new, my lord, there's no meat
Upon the head of valour, which indeed
The reverend'st throat in Athens. So I leave you
To propagate their states: amongst them all,
Stay not, fly, whilst thou art blest and free:
of the infinite flatteries that follow youth and opulency.
Feign'd Fortune to be throned: the base o' the mount
Sow all the Athenian bosoms, and their crop
Exit
Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound
And set mine eyes at flow.
[Aside]  I scarce know how.
I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship
The time is unagreeable to this business:
Hearing the surges threat: we must all part
Hath blazed with lights and bray'd with minstrelsy,
Attends he here, or no? Lucilius!
Are they not Athenians?
So, so, my lord.
Exit
My lord? my lord?
And nature, as it grows again toward earth,
Well, what further?
Lucilius' Servant	Here's mine.
What dost thou think 'tis worth?
If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.
Enter TIMON, from the cave
What shall defend the interim? and at length
Enter TIMON, in a rage, FLAMINIUS following
bare friendship, without security. Here's three
Must I be his last refuge! His friends, like
Thou liest.
I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant: my
Drum beats. Exeunt ALCIBIADES, PHRYNIA, and TIMANDRA
That lies on Dian's lap! thou visible god,
The gods are witness,
Would one day stamp upon me: 't has been done,
That stay at home, if bearing carry it,
Has caught me in his eye: I will present
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.
Isidore's Servant	A plague upon him, dog!
For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure--
Who dies, that bears not one spurn to their graves
Ha! a drum ? Thou'rt quick,
My lord,--
How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?
The breath is gone whereof this praise is made:
Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him
And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,
What, thyself?
Well met, good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.
Enter two Lords
All have not offended,
And dispossess her all.
I rode on: it is yours, because you liked it.
Timandra had gold of him: he likewise enriched poor
What is it, Timon?
Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall,
My dearest lord, bless'd, to be most accursed,
but in the plainer and simpler kind of people, the
That he will neither know how to maintain it,
When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
Hautboys playing loud music. A great banquet  served in, FLAVIUS and others attending, then enter  TIMON, ALCIBIADES, Lords, Senators, and VENTIDIUS.  Then comes, dropping, after all, APEMANTUS, discontentedly, like himself
Exeunt
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.
Art thou Timandra?
Nor are they living
His days are foul and his drink dangerous.
Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake,
As I can bid thee speak.
two brace of greyhounds.
Of him that, his particular to foresee,
Rogue, rogue, rogue!
SCENE II. Before the walls of Athens.
That he may never more false title plead,
Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost a
That, by killing of villains,
Good even, Varro: what,
And late, five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore
Gold? yellow, glittering, precious gold? No, gods,
To speak with Timon.
Exit
I have lost my gown.
To those that, without heed, do plunge into 't.
Against the walls of Athens.
Will knit and break religions, bless the accursed,
Most noble lord,
Tell out my blood.
of will or testament which argues a great sickness
That what he speaks is all in debt, he owes
Taste, touch and smell, pleased from thy tale rise,
Many a bounteous year must be employ'd
That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels,
ever know beloved?
By decimation, and a tithed death--
Which my lord paid for, be of any power
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
Have you forgot me, sir?
My lord,--
Exit
Find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light. Come.
That I may make his lordship understand
Provokes itself and like the current flies
persuading me to it.
I go, sir.
I should think so: he hath sent me an earnest
Consumptions sow
To FLAVIUS
Lucilius' Servant	Put in now, Titus.
To Servant
After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,
Varro's Servant	Thou art not altogether a fool.
Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
And drown themselves in riot! Itches, blains,
Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff
For all her cherubim look.
ladies most desirous of admittance.
Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears,
taking, I doubt me.
Well mock'd.
But with a noble fury and fair spirit,
Varro's Servant	What is a whoremaster, fool?
Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.
So his familiars to his buried fortunes
It stains the glory in that happy verse
The man is honest.
So:
Enter TIMON
Enter Senators on the walls
That labour on the bosom of this sphere
Ay.
Whose naked natures live in an the spite
What yours?--and yours?
They only now come but to feast thine eyes.
If money were as certain as your waiting,
'Tis so, be sure of it.
He commands us to provide, and give great gifts,
How goes the world, that I am thus encounter'd
Flinty mankind, whose eyes do never give
And let the unscarr'd braggarts of the war
one need not lend to another, for, were your
Is this the Athenian minion, whom the world
To say thou'lt enter friendly.
Be as a planetary plague, when Jove
encountered: I hope it is not so low with him as
straggling soldiers with great quantity: 'tis said
At all times alike
I never had honest man about me, I, all
Being free itself, it thinks all others so.
I'll give you gold enough.
before the gods, I am not able to do,--the more
Of their friends' gift?
I am right glad that his health is well, sir: and
I cannot choose but tell him, that I care not,
Could I but catch it for them.
Exit
did but try us this other day.
Exeunt
Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
to-morrow to hunt with him, and has sent your honour
vain-glories?
Not one accompanying his declining foot.
[To the Fool]  Why, how now, captain! what do you
If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,
and give way: when I know not what else to do, I'll
Would we were all discharged!
performance is ever the duller for his act, and,
And enter in our ears like great triumphers
Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon,
Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of
Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
spirit--give thee thy due--and one that knows what
Noble Ventidius! Well,
Lucilius' Servant	Mark, how strange it shows,
Varro's
Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS
Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
upon thee!
The Lords rise from table, with much adoring of  TIMON, and to show their loves, each singles out an  Amazon, and all dance, men with women, a lofty strain or two to the hautboys, and cease
thy life: all thy safety were remotion and thy
Rich men sin, and I eat root.
The senators of Athens: happy man!
Have smit my credit: I love and honour him,
That makes the wappen'd widow wed again,
Shall I try friends: you shall perceive how you
A lack of Timon's aid, hath sense withal
But by contempt of nature.
Think not on 't, sir.
A gentleman that well deserves a help:
Varro's Servant	How dost, fool?
Enter Cupid
Yes, mine's three thousand crowns: what's yours?
Came not my friend nor I.
Of its own fail, restraining aid to Timon,
He passes.
Your importunacy cease till after dinner,
Thy beagles with thee.
But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,
What trumpet's that?
man so bad as is thyself.
Burn, house! sink, Athens! henceforth hated be
An honest poor servant of yours.
Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!
Servilius! you are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well:
knowest well enough, although thou comest to me,
That had, give't these fellows
Varro's
Nay, sir, but hear me on.
Make soft thy trenchant sword, for those milk-paps,
I do beseech you, know me.
To bring it into danger.
Ay, would they served us!
But who is man that is not angry?
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
And sweetly felt it.
My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn
Exeunt all but APEMANTUS and TIMON
Thou dost affect my manners, and dost use them.
should fall
For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,
With letters of entreaty, which imported
Where?
Exit
part, I must needs confess, I have received some
Poor rogue hereditary. Hence, be gone!
And this is all a liberal course allows,
Wherefore you are not paid.
Who, the Lord Timon? he is my very good friend, and
Than to abhor himself: even he drops down
SCENE I. A room in Lucullus' house.
My lord, here is my bill.
Let die the spotted.
Buried his father, by whose death he's stepp'd
Thou disease of a friend, and not himself!
Immortal gods, I crave no pelf,
How do you, gentlemen?
'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,
Exeunt Servants
I also wish it to you. I think this honourable lord
With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods
The want whereof doth daily make revolt
Please your lordship, here is the wine.
Lays her full mess before you. Want! why want?
Exeunt
You do yourselves
Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this,
His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains:
I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all
That nature, being sick of man's unkindness,
Is this the balsam that the usuring senate
All villains that do stand by thee are pure.
small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels
I'ld give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.
Nor I.
Plays in the right hand, thus: but tell him,
in his judgment that makes it.
Crust you quite o'er! What, dost thou go?
man to kill him: 't has been proved. If I were a
Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.
Weigh but the crime with this.
Who would be so mock'd with glory? or to live
But rather one that smiles and still invites
And chance it as it may.
He sent to me, sir,--Here he comes.
Enter SERVILIUS
friends? O, what a precious comfort 'tis, to have
Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,
Acknowledge thee their patron, and come freely
And yet--O, see the monstrousness of man
Thy back, I prithee.
Come not to me again: but say to Athens,
Banish me!
Please you, my lord, that honourable
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius:
Believe't, that we'll do any thing for gold.
I am no idle votarist: roots, you clear heavens!
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
Come with me, fool, come.
O my lord,
As the moon does, by wanting light to give:
And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
So are they all, for every grise of fortune
That through the window-bars bore at men's eyes,
Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.
Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up
I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on,
You gods, reward them!
Besides, his expedition promises
mistress is one, and I am her fool. When men come
Now, thieves?
To the April day again. Come, damned earth,
For 'tis a bond in men. Give him thy daughter:
You have work'd for me, there's payment for you: hence!
were the most needless creatures living, should we
Hath made thee hard in't. Why shouldst thou hate men?
Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I
What, dost thou weep? Come nearer. Then I
Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?
love thee,
Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?
What we can do, we'll do, to do you service.
'Faith, for the worst is filthy, and would not hold
Descend, and open your uncharged ports:
That these great towers, trophies and schools
Exit
And your great flow of debts. My loved lord,
I know them both, th' other's a jeweller.
Exit
My lord?
I was directed hither: men report
I must needs appear.
Trumpet sounds. Enter a Messenger
Fell from their boughs and left me open, bare
I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.
Has almost charmed me from my profession, by
Put up thy gold: go on,--here's gold,--go on,
I am quit.
A dedicated beggar to the air,
The other, at high wish: best state, contentless,
Enter FLAVIUS, with two or three Servants
that goes of his having.
My noble general, Timon is dead,
Enter other Servants
How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,
Caphis, I say!
What does his lordship mean?
politic, he crossed himself by 't: and I cannot
The unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.
Go to:
I have, in this rough work, shaped out a man,
Look thee, 'tis so! Thou singly honest man,
Do 't in your parents' eyes! bankrupts, hold fast,
bears that office, to signify their pleasures.
But where one villain is, then him abandon.
Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.
No, indeed, he is not.
Something hath been amiss--a noble nature
To the gold
Sun, hide thy beams! Timon hath done his reign.
If where thou art two villains shall not be,
For mine own part,
By all description this should be the place.
it.
Nor came any of his bounties over me,
They all stand ceremoniously looking on TIMON
SCENE VI. The same. A banqueting-room in Timon's house.
Let's see your piece.
That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.
SCENE I. Athens. A hall in Timon's house.
which I hear from common rumours: now Lord Timon's
True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed,
By night frequents my house. I am a man
I know thee too, and more than that I know thee,
Hath suffer'd under praise.
Like madness is the glory of this life.
'Tis a spirit: sometime't appears like a lord,
How now, my lords!
Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows
Upon his good and gracious nature hanging
Looking at the jewel
Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts
other men? Do so, I have gold for thee.
Of regular justice in your city's bounds,
to-day: you, to Sempronius: commend me to their
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!
As to advance this jewel, accept it and wear it,
desperate ones, for a madman owes 'em.
When man was wish'd to love his enemies!
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!
So thou apprehendest it: take it for thy labour.
Will 't hold? will 't hold?
Much wrong, you bate too much of your own merits:
But to support him after. Fare you well.
That framed him thus: time, with his fairer hand,
To LUCIUS
Hath conjured to attend. I know the merchant.
Enter ALCIBIADES, with drum and fife, in warlike manner, PHRYNIA and TIMANDRA
Exeunt
That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up
Why dost thou seek me out?
Throws the dishes at them, and drives them out
My lord, 'tis rated
I see them now, then was a blessed time.
And so, intending other serious matters,
For tubs and baths, bring down rose-cheeked youth
'Tis a good piece.
Or any token of thine honour else,
Enter SERVILIUS
Re-enter Servant, with wine
Against our rampired gates, and they shall ope,
Till I have thank'd you: when dinner's done,
He'll spare none.
Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord!
With it beat out his brains! Piety, and fear,
things go.
And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
Although, I know, you 'll swear, terribly swear
And, for I know your reverend ages love
Isidore's Servant	It is so.
What wouldst thou have to Athens?
My worthy friends, will you draw near?
Am I to you.
Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.
Than where swine feed!
Know you the quality of Lord Timon's fury?
Good fellows all,
In purity of manhood stand upright,
Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?
To thee be worship! and thy saints for aye
set him clear. How fairly this lord strives to
Periods his comfort.
Has paid his men their wages: he ne'er drinks,
Rich, only to be wretched, thy great fortunes
I am so far already in your gifts,--
And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.
Some beast rear'd this, there does not live a man.
the time use thee well: good parts in thee.
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
And does he send to me? Three? hum!
And be no turncoats: yet may your pains, six months,
Lucilius' Servant	Five thousand mine.
For that I knew it the most general way--
You tell me true.
come forth?
Put armour on thine ears and on thine eyes,
Thou sun, that comfort'st, burn! Speak, and
I am sure you have: speak truth, ye're honest men.
to thirteen, this spirit walks in.
Ay, you are honest men.
Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus:
Coming forward
Music, make their welcome!
No, my most worthy master, in whose breast
Make large confusion, and, thy fury spent,
For law is strict, and war is nothing more.
I love thee better now than e'er I did.
dined with him, and told him on't, and come again to
Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,
And be in debt to none--yet, more to move you,
First mend my company, take away thyself.
[Aside]  Nor more willingly leaves winter, such
From high to low throughout, that whoso please
He is an usurer: strike me the counterfeit matron,
I, that I was
When all's spent, he 'ld be cross'd then, an he could.
Here is no use for gold.
Religion groans at it.
Noble Timon,
True,
to Lord Lucullus you: I hunted with his honour
Varro's Servants	And ours, my lord.
One only daughter have I, no kin else,
Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men,
I not desire to know. Follow thy drum,
Hath doubtfully pronounced thy throat shall cut,
Enter TIMON and Attendants
His friend that dips in the same dish? for, in
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
some part of our zeals, we should think ourselves
The more accursed thou, that still omitt'st it.
so many, like brothers, commanding one another's
Seeing his reputation touch'd to death,
This is the old man still.
Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
Well, sir, I will, therefore, I will, sir, thus:
Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,
ACT I
Into this sea of air.
The Athenians both within and out that wall!
You should have fear'd false times when you did feast:
Obedience fail in children! slaves and fools,
When crouching marrow in the bearer strong
My lord,--
What friendship may I do thee?
I'll keep you company.
Gramercies, good fool: how does your mistress?
I'll once more feast the rascals.
I am glad you're well.
Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.
So 'tis: this comes off well and excellent.
If Timon stay at home. You three serve three usurers?
Best in all Athens: thou'rt, indeed, the best,
Beseech your honour
Ceremony was but devised at first
Shall make their harbour in our town, till we
Varro's Servant	Hang him, he'll abuse us.
Please you to dispose yourselves.
Isidore's Servant	From Isidore,
I scorn thy meat, 'twould choke me, for I should
Enter LUCILIUS, with three Strangers
In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!
And give them title, knee and approbation
And let confusion live! Plagues, incident to men,
he fit for't, indeed.
If I speak like a captain.
I'll tell you true. I'll call to you.
What viler thing upon the earth than friends
Yea, 'gainst the authority of manners, pray'd you
I prithee, let's be provided to show them
And my reliances on his fracted dates
Exeunt all except APEMANTUS
But I do prize it at my love before
yet, had he mistook him and sent to me, I should
We but offend him. Strike!
As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes,
Bowing his head against the sleepy mount
Graves only be men's works and death their gain!
Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thou
Enter CAPHIS
Of grave and austere quality, tender down
One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,
A piece of painting, which I do beseech
Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
And with such sober and unnoted passion
he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.
To accept my grief and whilst this poor wealth lasts
I met a courier, one mine ancient friend,
I clear'd him with five talents: greet him from me,
Yield him, who all thy human sons doth hate,
Nor cease his flow of riot: takes no account
basin and ewer to-night. Flaminius, honest
I am as poor as you.
And hang himself. I pray you, do my greeting.
That's not feigned, he is so.
It shows but little love or judgment in him:
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
What thou deny'st to men, let prisons swallow 'em,
If thou didst put this sour-cold habit on
Tell them there I have gold, look, so I have.
To cure thy o'er-night's surfeit? Call the creatures
The enemies' drum is heard, and fearful scouring
A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,
Eats and drinks
And shortly must I fell it: tell my friends,
Have I once lived to see two honest men?
that this is no time to lend money, especially upon
Exeunt ALCIBIADES and Lords
That you are thieves profess'd, that you work not
I weigh my friend's affection with mine own,
Our terrible approach.
Ay, defiled land, my lord.
Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
Make them best seen and known.
Royal cheer, I warrant you.
Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:
Cries of itself 'No more:' now breathless wrong
speak in your own behalf, and thus far I confirm
What means that trump?
O my good lord,
They confess
house to put his head in? such may rail against
And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still,
Seek not my name: a plague consume you wicked
I pray you, upon what?
The dishes are uncovered and seen to be full of warm water
Away,
More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.
For any benefit that points to me,
One of Lord Timon's men.
And my estate deserves an heir more raised
Of comely virtues:
While you have throats to answer: for myself,
Live, and love thy misery.
Take my deserts to his, and join 'em both:
the request be fifty talents.
They have all been touch'd and found base metal, for
supposed distress of his: it will show honestly in
O, he's the very soul of bounty!
To revenge is no valour, but to bear.
Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?
Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
Entomb'd upon the very hem o' the sea,
Banish your dotage, banish usury,
May catch a wrench--would all were well--'tis pity,--
Would all those fatterers were thine enemies then,
to borrow of your masters, they approach sadly, and
Still serve him with my life. My dearest master!
Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery
Commend me to them,
Joy had the like conception in our eyes
Those enemies of Timon's and mine own
Warr'st thou 'gainst Athens?
mere want of gold, and the falling-from of his
Rob one another. There's more gold. Cut throats:
For thy best use and wearing.
Exit Servants
And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,
and a knave, which not-withstanding, thou shalt be
against such a good time, when I might ha' shown
Go not away. What have you there, my friend?
Offering him a root
Doors, that were ne'er acquainted with their wards
And, when he's sick to death, let not that part of nature
Enter Senator, with papers in his hand
Out, rascal dogs!
Look you, I love you well, I'll give you gold,
Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. Here's to thee.
Thou weepest to make them drink, Timon.
The gods confound them all in thy conquest,
Varro's Servant	I fear it.
friends, if we should ne'er have need of 'em? they
The want that makes him lean. Who dares, who dares,
Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine
Most welcome, sir!
With drunken spilth of wine, when every room
Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave,
Most thankfully, my lord.
Enter the Senators from TIMON
Thou ever young, fresh, loved and delicate wooer,
Hang thyself!
Not seldom, nor no slight cheques, when I have
And have the dates in contempt.
Convert o' the instant, green virginity,
to thy flatterers?
fragment, some slender sort of his remainder: the
What an alteration of honour
and thy perfume, they mocked thee for too much
If you did know, my lord, my master's wants--
But in a dream of friendship?
Who were the motives that you first went out,
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen, I would be
Keeping some gold
To pay your present debts.
at their society, as their friendship, may
I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
TIMON comes from his cave, behind
On what I hate I feed not.
Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
exquisite friend.
To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.
There is no crossing him in 's humour,
Let us first see peace in Athens: there is no time
That thou turn rascal, hadst thou wealth again,
O, here's Servilius, now we shall know some answer.
[Within]  Servilius, help! My lord! my lord!
I am an humble suitor to your virtues,
thine own work? wilt thou whip thine own faults in
How full of valour did he bear himself
A thousand pieces!
Go to my steward.
It would unclew me quite.
Exeunt Senators
Be as cauterizing to the root o' the tongue,
Of Athens here, my lord.
This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,
Where feed'st thou o' days, Apemantus?
And mar men's spurring. Crack the lawyer's voice,
How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?
Which was not half so beautiful and kind,
Ay, Timon, and have cause.
Among the route of nations, I will make thee
They dance! they are mad women.
I give you, and gold confound you howsoe'er! Amen.
A thousand pieces.
Good gods!
themselves have provided that I shall have much help
devil knew not what he did when he made man
I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth,
Are drown'd and lost in his calamities.
O, pray, let's see't: for the Lord Timon, sir?
ACT V
Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late:
I never tasted Timon in my life,
E'en as Apemantus does now, hate a lord with my heart.
How things go from him, nor resumes no care
From Alcibiades to Timon's cave,
The gods preserve ye!
Ducks to the golden fool: all is oblique,
Flaminius, you are very respectively welcome, sir.
For many so arrive at second masters,
My wounds ache at you.
That are given for 'em. Friendship's full of dregs:
Most true, the law shall bruise him.
One business does command us all, for mine Is money.
Soldiers, not thieves.
Without repugnancy? If there be
Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
If in her marriage my consent be missing,
I am thinking what I shall say I have provided for
Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath,
An honour in him which buys out his fault--
While they have told their money and let out
[Aside]  I'll meet you at the turn. What a
Yes.
For every storm that blows: I, to bear this,
Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draught,
Upon that were my thoughts tiring, when we
Enter LUCULLUS
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
A thing slipp'd idly from me.
I bleed inwardly for my lord.
Myself have spoke in vain.
The common stroke of war.
I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
be hang'd:
Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to
Nay, let's seek him:
How do you? What's the news?
Thy mistress is o' the brothel! Son of sixteen,
Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack,
And mince it sans remorse: swear against objects,
To Poet
No prodigal.
And minister in their steads! to general filths
is his: I ha' told him on't, but I could ne'er get
Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with weeping!
And say, you found them in mine honesty.
We make ourselves fools, to disport ourselves,
They're welcome all, let 'em have kind admittance:
with better music.
Destruction fang mankind! Earth, yield me roots!
His country's peace.
Now the gods keep you old enough, that you may live
Save only the gods: now his friends are dead,
All those which were his fellows but of late,
rest of your fees, O gods--the senators of Athens,
Enter a Servant
Descend, and keep your words.
I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.
An thou hadst hated meddlers sooner, thou shouldst
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
Having often of your open bounty tasted,
O, Apemantus, you are welcome.
Owe their estates unto him.
When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?
No, I'll nothing: for if I should be bribed too,
They have au denied him.
What! to you,
She's e'en setting on water to scald such chickens
My lord,
for true, that he's so full of gold?
I am sick of this false world, and will love nought
man a doit.
Exeunt
To Apemantus, that few things loves better
And let his very breath, whom thou'lt observe,
Hereafter more. Bring me into your city,
Methinks thou art more honest now than wise,
'tis not amiss we tender our loves to him, in this
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
To your free heart, I do return those talents,
Thou know'st I do: I call'd thee by thy name.
In holier shapes: for there is boundless theft
Let's make no stay.
But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.
And call it excellent: thou wast told thus,
In vain! his service done
He is a man, setting his fate aside,
Nor sound his quillets shrilly: hoar the flamen,
What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,
Put on a most importunate aspect,
With favour never clasp'd, but bred a dog.
Or a keeper with my freedom,
To trust man on his oath or bond,
against the softness of prosperity, with a discovery
All sorts of hearts, yea, from the glass-faced flatterer
Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.
I had rather be alone.
To him that worships thee!
The greater scorns the lesser: not nature,
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
If, after two days' shine, Athens contain thee,
I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt
Let's yet be fellows, let's shake our heads, and say,
Exit APEMANTUS
And go along with him!
Varro's
Both too, and women's sons.
Of Hymen's purest bed! thou valiant Mars!
Is't true? can't be?
deities be despised. Lend to each man enough, that
Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?
Not without fair reward.
destruction. For these my present friends, as they
For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.
Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.
Like workmen. I'll example you with thievery.
Why?
that, when your lordship this other day sent to me,
more of you to myself than you can with modesty
Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.
Fit I meet them.
Not worth my thinking. How now, poet!
In different beds of lust, and never learn'd
Imprison'd and in scarcity of friends,
Their services to Lord Timon: his large fortune
So are we all.
Yet an arch-villain keeps him company.
A noble spirit!
Subdues and properties to his love and tendance
Your aprons mountant: you are not oathable,
'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
Forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbour states,
With my more noble meaning, not a man
His health is well sir.
Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you!
god's gold,
That makes the senate ugly.
That he is worshipp'd in a baser temple
It is a pretty mocking of the life.
curiosity, in thy rags thou knowest none, but art
I will unbolt to you.
You witch me in it,
Painting is welcome.
But breeds the giver a return exceeding
huge man, I should fear to drink at meals,
Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof
With more than common thanks I will receive it.
'Tis not well mended so, it is but botch'd,
Wrought he not well that painted it?
Then I lie not.
Do on the oak, hive with one winter's brush
Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues
You perpetual-sober gods! I do proclaim
Varro's Servant	Is't not your business too?
O blessed breeding sun, draw from the earth
With wax I brought away, whose soft impression
It is against my heart.
Soft! take thy physic first--thou too--and thou,--
see thee again.
Would 'twere so!
That your activity may defeat and quell
As you are great, be pitifully good:
Jeweller: You know me, Apemantus?
And skip where thou point'st out? will the
As those which sell would give: but you well know,
No matter:--wear them, betray with them: whore still,
Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
Had his necessity made use of me,
With all the abhorred births below crisp heaven
The sun's a thief, and with his great attraction
Lucilius' Servant	Five thousand crowns, my lord.
should purchase the day before for a little part,
You have added worth unto 't and lustre,
Against my honour?
Five thousand drops pays that.
I'll believe him as an enemy, and give over my trade.
Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
Enter FLAMINIUS.
eat three: if thou wert the fox, the lion would
The little casket bring me hither.
It is the pasture lards the rother's sides,
And taste Lord Timon's bounty? he outgoes
Yes, my lord. More jewels yet!
shapes that man goes up and down in from fourscore
Enter Page
Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows,
Exit FLAVIUS. TIMON retires to his cave
use fifty talents, hath sent to your lordship to
I will dispatch you severally, you to Lord Lucius,
Scarce is dividant, touch them with several fortunes,
Fill me some wine.
How shall she be endow'd,
with two stones moe than's artificial one: he is
very often like a knight, and, generally, in all
But yet they could have wish'd--they know not--
Enter a Soldier, seeking TIMON
Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more:
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,
Always a villain's office or a fool's.
Our horses!
With any size of words.
ACT II
Enter SEMPRONIUS, and a Servant of TIMON's
Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?
Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
Have I been ever free, and must my house
Thou flatter'st misery.
Things of like value differing in the owners
Teems, and feeds all, whose self-same mettle,
That scolds against the quality of flesh,
To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
All that pass by. It cannot hold: no reason
Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow,
He last asked the question. Poor rogues, and
Excellent! Your lordship's a goodly villain. The
Bid him suppose some good necessity
What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself
Serving alike in sorrow: leak'd is our bark,
Perchance some single vantages you took.
How quickly were it gone!
the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place:
'Tis thou that rigg'st the bark and plough'st the foam,
ne'er have denied his occasion so many talents.
Has much disgraced me in't, I'm angry at him,
Is not my lord seen yet?
Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks: to
Here lie I, Timon, who, alive, all living men did hate:
Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!
And take down the interest into their
I will, sir.
Where liest o' nights, Timon?
afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an
Now, captain?
found time to use 'em toward a supply of money: let
Jeweller:	I have a jewel here--
If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
breakfast to the wolf: if thou wert the wolf, thy
Rid me these villains from your companies:
Varro's
Exit
defence absence. What beast couldst thou be, that
Though his right arm might purchase his own time
And so 'scape hanging: trust not the physician,
Lucilius' Servant	Ay, but the days are wax'd shorter with him:
Interprets for my poor ignorance.
And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,
To FLAVIUS
wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by the
It does: but time will--and so--
enough. Who can speak broader than he that has no
Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord,
I'll wait upon you instantly.
'Tis much deep: and it should seem by the sun,
Outlives encertain pomp, is crown'd before:
As you have said, my lord.
His means most short, his creditors most strait:
That solder'st close impossibilities,
I never did thee harm.
It is: and yours too, Isidore?
You knot of mouth-friends I smoke and lukewarm water
And entertain'd me with mine own device,
What shall be done? he will not hear, till feel:
To have his pomp and all what state compounds
Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
For pity is the virtue of the law,
My honours to you, upon his good returns.
Blow off thy cap, praise his most vicious strain,
With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept
Had you not fully laid my state before me,
And now I remember, my lord, you gave
I'll show you how to observe a strange event.
or since dishonour traffics with man's nature,
Exeunt LUCILIUS and Old Athenian
If wisdom be in suffering. O my lords,
He pours it out, Plutus, the god of gold,
It could not else be, I should prove so base,
Ladies! what are their wills?
Grant I may never prove so fond,
Coupled to nature.
When my indispos ition put you back:
I do conceive.
But in thy fortunes am unlearn'd and strange.
Women nearest, but men, men are the things
And I am sent expressly to your lordship.
You'll take it ill.
suspect thee, when peradventure thou wert accused by
dog's death. Answer not, I am gone.
My lords, if not for any parts in him--
Till you hear further from me.
More whore, more mischief first, I have given you earnest.
Hath to the marbled mansion all above
promise him an excellent piece.
We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,
I saw them speak together.
assistance therein.
Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste,
these letters: I know not which is which.
If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,
That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods,
I thank you, you shall hear from me anon:
In like manner was I in debt to my importunate
And now Ventidius is wealthy too,
The bounteous housewife, nature, on each bush
Drink the free air.
a score of villains: if there sit twelve women at
Hang thee, monster!
Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all
I have so: what of him?
I flatter not, but say thou art a caitiff.
Art not one?
Trouble him no further, thus you still shall find him.
I know his lordship is but merry with me,
O my good lord, the world is but a word:
Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage:
If you had sent but two hours before,--
Call'st thou that harm?
In limited professions. Rascal thieves,
Were I like thee, I'ld throw away myself.
Here 'tis.
It comes not ill, I hate not to be banish'd,
Doth choke the air with dust: in, and prepare:
Ay,
Come not near him. If thou wouldst not reside
Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon: I come to
You shall not make me welcome:
Yes.
Infects one comma in the course I hold,
Dost thou, or dost thou not, heaven's curse
You breathe in vain.
Who once a day with his embossed froth
I like this well, he will return again.
Each man apart, all single and alone,
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
Please you, my lord, there are certain
By your leave, sir,--
Freely, good father.
have loved thyself better now. What man didst thou
How now! what news?
In our condition.
That I'll requite its last? No:
And mine, my lord.
Ah, my good friend, what cheer?
Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
he abides.
If I would sell my horse, and buy twenty more
Pray, sit, more welcome are ye to my fortunes
Is not this he?
That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,
and undo a great deal of honoured! Servilius, now,
That art thyself a man?
Come, bring in all together.
Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leas,
Isidore's Servant	         Your steward puts me off, my lord,
Upon the beached verge of the salt flood,
Before proud Athens he's set down by this,
Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,
Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin
Smells from the general weal: make curl'd-pate
O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce
Exeunt Banditti
dog.
That girdlest in those wolves, dive in the earth,
The state or fortune fall into my keeping,
When every feather sticks in his own wing,
To some she beggar and compounded thee
I must serve him so too, tell him of an intent
For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue
Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb,
Under that's above me.
Exit Servant
Fall and no more: and, to atone your fears
Let it go naked, men may see't the better:
All our bills.
Lucilius' Servant	Flaminius! Sir, a word: pray, is my lord ready to
O, forget
Exit
A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?
Timon in this should pay more than he owes:
'Twere sure enough.
Whom, though in general part we were opposed,
This gentleman of mine hath served me long:
I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.
I take all and your several visitations
Must not be toss'd and turn'd to me in words,
entertainment.
I thank you, sir.
dinner of friends.
Vouchsafe my labour, and long live your lordship!
That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
Within there! Flaminius! Servilius!
Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive
The turbulent surge shall cover: thither come,
You see this confluence, this great flood
In my penurious band: I have heard, and grieved,
And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,
Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fix'd,
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery,
Lord Timon's mad.
Give us some gold, good Timon: hast thou more?
Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
Together with a recompense more fruitful
Whose proof, nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.
And make him weigh with her.
'I go, sir!'--Take the bonds along with you,
Nothing else: you shall see him a palm in Athens
Speaks his own standing! what a mental power
So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,
'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,
He humbly prays your speedy payment.
And wonder of good deeds evilly bestow'd!
Attend our weightier judgment. And, not to swell
If not a usuring kindness, and, as rich men deal gifts,
To climb his happiness, would be well express'd
These flies are couch'd.
sit, sit. The gods require our thanks.
requesting your lordship to supply his instant use
Exit
And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which
That from my first have been inclined to thrift,
Of man and beast the infinite malady
Since riches point to misery and contempt?
Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puff'd,
'Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advises
physicians,
Exit
Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.
But his occasion might have woo'd me first,
SCENE IV. The same. A hall in Timon's house.
himself, for he does neither affect company, nor is
Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
Above their quantity.
business, but he would not hear my excuse. I am
He did behave his anger, ere 'twas spent,
You are an alchemist, make gold of that.
In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them:
belongs to reason, and canst use the time well, if
despised for the contrary. There's a medlar for
O you gods!
An thou shouldst, thou 'ldst anger ladies.
Methinks, false hearts should never have sound legs,
the ass: if thou wert the ass, thy dulness would
Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.
Ay, too well.
In a wide sea of wax: no levell'd malice
In our dear peril.
The painting is almost the natural man,
My lord,--
Let moulten coin be thy damnation,
I know not.
You come for money?
Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,
What levity's in youth.
We are hither come to offer you our service.
Varro's
So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give,
Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have
SCENE II. Athens. A room in Timon's house.
Exeunt Cupid and Ladies
are born to do benefits: and what better or
It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.
again, and flourish with the highest. Therefore
As I had leave of means?
Methinks they should invite them without knives,
Is like the sun's, but not, like his, recoverable.
Here come our brothers.
As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where
man is ever angry. Go, let him have a table by
This was my lord's best hope, now all are fled,
Enter APEMANTUS and Fool
Commend me bountifully to his good lordship, and I
And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent!
Was born of woman.
That I might love thee something.
Promise me friendship, but perform none: if thou
Is but his steward: no meed, but he repays
The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
Labouring for nine.
'Twixt natural son and sire! thou bright defiler
That of his bounties taste! The five best senses
Servants embrace, and part several ways
My lord, you have my voice to it, the fault's
It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,
But shall be render'd to your public laws
Our hope in him is dead: let us return,
Assurance bless your thoughts!
To vex thee.
All use of quittance.
Exit
Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!
Settlest admired reverence in a slave:
Think it a bastard, whom the oracle
What!
Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.
I understand thee, thou hadst some means to keep a
Than one which holds a trencher.
Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
Moe than you rob: take wealth and lives together,
They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves.
Varro's Servant	One Varro's servant, my good lord,--
As beasts and birds and fishes.
Whose present grace to present slaves and servants
Here comes the lord.
Myself.
Tucket, within
Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,
Varro's Servant	'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks And past.
Would poison were obedient and knew my mind!
Enter FLAVIUS, with many bills in his hand
Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
[Reads the epitaph]  'Here lies a
These walls of ours
If I should pay you for't as 'tis extoll'd,
Does she love him?
Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
Admirable: how this grace
I need not tell him that, he knows you are too diligent.
myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you. We
How! how!
How!
Certain: Alcibiades reports it, Phrynia and
Aside
Though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs,
recompense this long stay: feast your ears with the
Have their ingratitude in them hereditary:
What charitable men afford to beggars.
The best and truest,
Dost dialogue with thy shadow?
Long live so, and so die.
When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
And pill by law. Maid, to thy master's bed,
It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy
Yes, sir, I shall.
Play the recanter, feeling in itself
the table, let a dozen of them be--as they are. The
men eat Timon, and he sees 'em not! It grieves me
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
Whose fall the mark of his ambition is.
paper shortly: what need these feasts, pomps and
To gratulate thy plenteous bosom: th' ear,
He has been known to commit outrages,
To show him what a beggar his heart is,
good lord! a noble gentleman 'tis, if he would not
[Aside]  Lord Lucius and Lucullus? hum!
Is your perfection. This is Timon's last,
When we may profit meet, and come too late.
And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels,
Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,
But thus condition'd: thou shalt build from men,
Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.
That I had no angry wit to be a lord.
Which manifold record not matches? See,
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Nay, stay thou out for earnest.
More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well
Break open shops, nothing can you steal,
Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.
I have, so much wit thou lackest.
But were our witty empress well afoot,
Therefore, great lords, be, as your titles witness,
I know not what it means, away with her!
That hath express'd himself in all his deeds
And bid the owners quench them with their tears.
And, being so, shall have like want of pity.
To be controll'd in that he frankly gave:
Ten years are spent since first he undertook
No, no, they would not do so foul a deed,
Cut off the proud'st conspirator that lives.
Till he be brought unto the empress' face,
Crown him and say 'Long live our emperor!'
For fear they die before their pardon come.
Lo, by thy side where Rape and Murder stands,
Defend the justice of my cause with arms,
with a grace?
But wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon drawn?
Because the law hath ta'en revenge on them.
Exeunt
And, if you love me, as I think you do,
And cut her hands and trimm'd her as thou saw'st.
You sad-faced men, people and sons of Rome,
Brought hither in a most unlucky hour,
This before all the world do I prefer,
Nor tongue, to tell me who hath martyr'd thee:
To do myself this reason and this right.
Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,
O earth, I will befriend thee more with rain,
Many good morrows to your majesty,
An if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe.
Came here to make us merry! and thou hast
Here's a young lad framed of another leer:
There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends,
Aside
Coal-black is better than another hue,
That he thereby may give a likely guess
Buz in the people's ears, there nought hath pass'd,
How would he hang his slender gilded wings,
Come hither, Aaron, I'll deceive them both:
Ascend, fair queen, Pantheon. Lords, accompany
This way, or not at all, stand you in hope.
Poor harmless fly,
Listen, fair madam: let it be your glory
And so supplant you for ingratitude,
Now let hot AEtna cool in Sicily,
Surprised! by whom?
For hands, to do Rome service, are but vain.
Come, sirrah, you must be hanged.
Reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed.
There speak, and strike, brave boys, and take
And let my spleenful sons this trull deflow'r.
Exit above
That womanhood denies my tongue to tell:
Madam, now shall ye see
Exeunt
Accompanied but with a barbarous Moor,
Ay, of my pigeons, sir, nothing else.
Whose high exploits and honourable deeds
Marry, for Justice, she is so employ'd,
Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good,
And stop their mouths, if they begin to cry.
Meanwhile I am possess'd of that is mine.
Pardon me, sir, it was a black ill-favor'd fly,
That for her love such quarrels may be broach'd
O, none of both but are of high desert:
Go to the empress, tell her this I said.
Upon the north side of this pleasant chase,
And brought to yoke, the enemies of Rome.
With this, my weapon drawn, I rush'd upon him,
Give me a staff of honour for mine age,
If there were reason for these miseries,
Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor,
To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits.
A charitable wish and full of love.
Now you have heard the truth, what say you, Romans?
That ever death should let life bear his name,
Religiously they ask a sacrifice:
Traitors, away! he rests not in this tomb:
In hope thyself should govern Rome and me.
Some stay to see him fasten'd in the earth.
Enter AARON, with a bag of gold
Then, afterwards, to order well the state,
[Aside]  Now will I fetch the king to find them here,
Ay, but the citizens favor Lucius,
O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips,
That you withdraw you and abate your strength,
To heal Rome's harms, and wipe away her woe!
Saucy controller of our private steps!
Lavinia will I make my empress,
Not I, till Mutius' bones be buried.
Kill'd her, for whom my tears have made me blind.
He lives in fame that died in virtue's cause.
Lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,
Thou shalt not bail them: see thou follow me.
Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed blood
So that perforce you must needs stay a time.
Stay, murderous villains! will you kill your brother?
Friends should associate friends in grief and woe:
Enter LAVINIA
Come, let's fall to, and, gentle girl, eat this:
But go thy ways, go, give that changing piece
Be chosen with proclamations to-day,
That hath dishonour'd all our family,
Better than he have worn Vulcan's badge.
Take this of me: Lucrece was not more chaste
Because kind nature doth require it so:
Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake.'
I say, my lord, that if I were a man,
Andronicus, would thou wert shipp'd to hell,
Like to the earth swallow her own increase.
Many a time he danced thee on his knee,
Why, lords, and think you not how dangerous
That Rome is but a wilderness of tigers?
My hand shall go.
By heaven, it shall not go!
Yet every mother breeds not sons alike:
Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet,
Doth make your honour of his body's hue,
Sirs, drag them from the pit unto the prison:
And in that paste let their vile heads be baked.
Now stay your strife: what shall be is dispatch'd.
Then sit we down, and let us all consult.
And oped their arms to embrace me as a friend.
forbid I should be so bold to press to heaven in my
Lastly, myself unkindly banished,
Lending your kind commiseration.
What news with thee, AEmilius?
Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine,
Till all these mischiefs be return'd again
Because the girl should not survive her shame,
A better head her glorious body fits
I am the sea, hark, how her sighs do blow!
Of this was Tamora delivered,
His sorrows have so overwhelm'd his wits,
Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy,
My lord, you pass not here.
That said'st I begg'd the empire at thy hands.
Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more dear
SCENE III. A lonely part of the forest.
kill'd him.
My youth can better spare my blood than you,
The thing whereat it trembles by surmise,
If there be devils, would I were a devil,
Exeunt Attendants
For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.
Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound:
They have been violent to me and mine.
Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare.
Speak, brother, hast thou hurt thee with the fall?
I'll dive into the burning lake below,
The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out,
And what he is that now is leap'd into it.
'Tis pity they should take him for a stag.
And, lest thou shouldst detect him, cut thy tongue.
Well, God give her good rest! What hath he sent her?
And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.
Beg at the gates, like Tarquin and his queen.
The trumpets show the emperor is at hand.
Do this, and purchase us thy lasting friends.'
Magni Dominator poli,
To gaze upon a ruinous monastery,
Approved warriors, and my faithful friends,
Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart
Here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with mud,
Brothers, help to convey her hence away,
Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.
Then hear me speak in indifferently for all,
And work confusion on his enemies.
And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust.
What, would you bury him in my despite?
Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks,
She takes the staff in her mouth, and guides it with her stumps, and writes
And shows the ragged entrails of the pit:
Shall I have justice? what says Jupiter?
Upon a gather'd lily almost wither'd.
As from a conduit with three issuing spouts,
Or make some sign how I may do thee ease:
How now, Lavinia! Marcus, what means this?
Pointing to the nurse
But like a drunkard must I vomit them.
As have thy love? Why dost not speak to me?
Have we done aught amiss,--show us wherein,
Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her:
To pardon Mutius and to bury him.
I'll speak no more but 'Vengeance rot you all!'
This growing image of thy fiend-like face?
With golden promises, that, were his heart
The cruel father and his traitorous sons,
Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave,
She giveth SATURNINUS a letter
Sirrah, come hither: make no more ado,
For many good and great deserts to Rome:
Fie, fie, how franticly I square my talk,
Shall be no shelter to these outrages:
And how desirous of our sight they are.
Unto the body of a dismal yew,
That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile
Flourish. Exeunt
Who found this letter? Tamora, was it you?
Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet,
High-witted Tamora to gloze with all:
When he by night lay bathed in maiden blood.
Clear up, fair queen, that cloudy countenance:
An if it please thee! why, assure thee, Lucius,
'Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak,
When heaven doth weep, doth not the earth o'erflow?
The cordial of mine age to glad my heart!
Rises
As far from help as Limbo is from bliss!
When with a happy storm they were surprised
Confusion fall--
And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.
Fitted by kind for rape and villany:
And they have nursed this woe, in feeding life,
My worthy lord, if ever Tamora
But let them hear what fearful words I utter.
For sauciness. I pray you, let us hence,
And therefore bind them, gentle Publius.
Aaron and thou look down into this den,
Renowned Lucius, from our troops I stray'd
And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.
God give you joy, sir, of your gallant bride!
And therefore mine shall save my brothers' lives.
And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,
Here none but soldiers and Rome's servitors
My lord, you are unjust, and, more than so,
like bloody villains.
Why dost thou laugh? it fits not with this hour.
Exit
Away with slavish weeds and servile thoughts!
For these bad bondmen to the yoke of Rome.
Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life!
My mother gave it me.
Re-enter TAMORA, with Attendants, TITUS ANDRONICUS, and Lucius
Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment,
And bow this feeble ruin to the earth:
Terras Astraea reliquit:
Look, Marcus! ah, son Lucius, look on her!
Till all the Andronici be made away.
Or brought a faggot to bright-burning Troy?
Is that the one will help to cut the other.
That both should speed?
Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome,
No noise, but silence and eternal sleep:
Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor:
That codding spirit had they from their mother,
Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep!
My grief was at the height before thou camest,
And sleep in peace, slain in your country's wars!
Nor age nor honour shall shape privilege:
Tell me, Andronicus, doth this motion please thee?
And tumble me into some loathsome pit,
ACT I
Where life hath no more interest but to breathe!
I will be bright, and shine in pearl and gold,
When as the one is wounded with the bait,
Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration,
Enter young LUCIUS, and LAVINIA running after him,  and the boy flies from her, with books under his arm. Then enter TITUS and MARCUS
Madam, to you as many and as good:
Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in.
Good king, to be so mightily abused!
When with his solemn tongue he did discourse
Rome's emperor, and nephew, break the parle,
He cuts their throats
So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.
My lord, to step out of these dreary dumps,
And when thy car is loaden with their heads,
I'll make you feed on berries and on roots,
That gives sweet tidings of the sun's uprise?
Publius, how now! how now, my masters!
Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.
Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus,
Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,
An if she do, I would I were an eunuch.
That is another's lawful promised love.
What Roman lord it was durst do the deed:
Dear father, soul and substance of us all,--
As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.
That have preserved her welfare in my blood,
For, by my father's reverend tomb, I vow
And rear'd aloft the bloody battle-axe,
It shall not live.
And tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
your turns,
Ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh,
In coffins from the field,
Nor me, so I were one.
The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax
Stand by me, Lucius, do not fear thine aunt.
As flowers with frost or grass beat down with storms:
'Tis present death I beg, and one thing more
The Tomb of the ANDRONICI appearing, the Tribunes  and Senators aloft. Enter, below, from one side,  SATURNINUS and his Followers, and, from the other side, BASSIANUS and his Followers, with drum and colours
What is your will?
Farewell, Andronicus: Revenge now goes
Falls into the pit
Marcus, my brother! 'tis sad Titus calls.
Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage,
Do thou so much as dig the grave for him:
In election for the Roman empery,
Give me pen and ink. Sirrah, can you with a grace
They shall be ready at your highness' will
Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies,
Who, when he knows thou art the empress' babe,
Can couch for fear, but I will find them out,
Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself,
To that I'll urge him: therefore thou shalt vow
Our father's tears despised, and basely cozen'd
Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ'd?
O, O, O,
And they have wish'd that Lucius were their emperor.
But, sure, some Tereus hath deflowered thee,
In Saturninus' health, whom, if she sleep,
I will bring in the empress and her sons,
And so repose, sweet gold, for their unrest
O Lord, sir, 'tis a deed of policy:
To Attendants
More hath it merited, that let it have.
My lord, what I have done, as best I may,
Gentle Lavinia, let me kiss thy lips.
Let me redeem my brothers both from death.
This is the tragic tale of Philomel,
O, well said, Lucius!
Even so mayst thou the giddy men of Rome.
As for that heinous tiger, Tamora,
And with thine own hands kill me in this place!
Have by my means been butcher'd wrongfully!
We may, each wreathed in the other's arms,
No mournful bell shall ring her burial,
[Aside]  Ay, and as good as Saturninus may.
Therefore, my lord, it highly us concerns
O grandsire, grandsire! even with all my heart
Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up.
Villain, what hast thou done?
I tell you, lords, you do but plot your deaths
Now I behold thy lively body so?
Are these thy ministers? what are they call'd?
If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
SCENE II. A forest near Rome. Horns and cry of hounds heard.
See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.
The chafed boar, the mountain lioness,
As if we should forget we had no hands,
This goodly summer with your winter mix'd.
But he and his shall know that justice lives
And where's your lesson, then? Boy, what say you?
Therefore I urge thy oath, for that I know
Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.
Grave witnesses of true experience,
By day and night to attend him carefully,
What fool hath added water to the sea,
He must be buried with his brethren.
With burial amongst their ancestors:
Receive my tears and seem to weep with me,
When, for his hand, he had his two sons' heads,
Now question me no more, we are espied,
Must we pursue, and I have found the path.
And overlooks the highest-peering hills,
In dangerous wars, whilst you securely slept,
Stay, Roman brethren! Gracious conqueror,
And is not careful what they mean thereby,
High emperor, upon my feeble knee
Why are you sequester'd from all your train,
I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.
Now give me some surance that thou art Revenge,
Enter PUBLIUS and others
Drums and trumpets sounded. Enter MARTIUS and  MUTIUS, After them, two Men bearing a coffin  covered with black, then LUCIUS and QUINTUS. After  them, TITUS ANDRONICUS, and then TAMORA, with  ALARBUS, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON, AARON, and other Goths,  prisoners, Soldiers and people following. The Bearers set down the coffin, and TITUS speaks
I am not bid to wait upon this bride.
But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn,
He is enfranchised and come to light:
Exit
The Roman emperor greets you all by me,
Ha, ha!
Will't please you eat? will't please your
Enter a Nurse, with a blackamoor Child in her arms
Tendering our sister's honour and our own.
Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,
But when ye have the honey ye desire,
To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.
No, Titus, no, the emperor needs her not,
O Tamora, be call'd a gentle queen,
What, was she ravish'd? tell who did the deed.
I wrote the letter that thy father found
And with my sword I'll keep this door safe.
Away, I say!
That shone so brightly when this boy was got,
Then thus I thump it down.
There serve your lusts, shadow'd from heaven's eye,
And here I swear by all the Roman gods,
Nothing so kind, but something pitiful!
You shall ask pardon of his majesty.
More than remembrance of my father's death.
But in her company there is a Moor,
What, have you met with her?
To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.
O were the sum of these that I should pay
Chief architect and plotter of these woes:
Thou hast no hands, to wipe away thy tears:
He and his lady both are at the lodge
Be cross with him, and I'll go fetch thy sons
And, for he understands you are in arms,
the next week.
Will not permit mine eyes once to behold
Lucius our emperor, for well I know
Sends thee this word,--that, if thou love thy sons,
Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons
Bear his betroth'd from all the world away.
Till you know better how to handle it.
She will a handmaid be to his desires,
And wilt thou have a reason for this coil?
them down again, for the man must not be hanged till
He dies upon my scimitar's sharp point
To wait, said I? to wanton with this queen,
It did me good, before the palace gate
Enter a Captain
But let us give him burial, as becomes,
Publius, Publius, what hast thou done?
Aside
She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.
Good Aaron, give his majesty my hand:
Your mother's hand shall right your mother's wrong.
If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall:
Farewell, Lavinia, my noble sister,
For which attempt the judges have pronounced
Andronicus, I will entreat the king,
For now I stand as one upon a rock
Or get some little knife between thy teeth,
Trumpets sounded, and the coffin laid in the tomb
And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again,
Blushing to be encountered with a cloud.
Exeunt
Lo, at this tomb my tributary tears
Write thou good niece, and here display, at last,
Beheld his tears, and laugh'd so heartily,
And wonder greatly that man's face can fold
My brother dead! I know thou dost but jest:
A very excellent piece of villany:
What, madam! be dishonour'd openly,
And this the banquet she shall surfeit on,
And you must needs bestow her funeral,
And have a thousand times more cause than he
betwixt my uncle and one of the emperial's men.
And with your blood and it I'll make a paste,
She would applaud Andronicus' conceit:
'Tis true, the raven doth not hatch a lark:
Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did,
As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.
To hale thy vengeful waggon swift away,
And how by this their child shall be advanced,
What, are they in this pit? O wondrous thing!
But, soft! methinks I do digress too much,
Than wots the miller of, and easy it is
Patricians and plebeians, we create
Where bloody murder or detested rape
That to her brother which I said to thee:
Or shall we bite our tongues, and in dumb shows
From these devourers to be banished!
How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts
And from that womb where you imprison'd were
Yet in some sort they are better than the tribunes,
Re-enter Attendants with AARON
Reads
Tut, I have work enough for you to do.
And help to set a head on headless Rome.
Flourish. SATURNINUS courts TAMORA in dumb show
He kills the nurse
Proclaim our honours, lords, with trump and drum.
Do execution on my flesh and blood.
Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound,
Hold, hold, meanwhile here's money for thy charges.
For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant.
And be received for the emperor's heir,
That which thou canst not undo.
And cabin in a cave, and bring you up
To serve, and to deserve my mistress' grace,
That thou adorest and hast in reverence,
My tears are now prevailing orators.
When every thing doth make a gleeful boast?
Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome,
This scatter'd corn  into one mutual sheaf,
Come, boy, and go with me: thy sight is young,
This prince in justice seizeth but his own.
And by her presence still renew his sorrows.
To beautify thy triumphs and return,
Because they died in honour's lofty bed.
It doth, my worthy lord, and in this match
Thou canst not strike it thus to make it still.
That I may slumber in eternal sleep!
This maugre all the world will I keep safe,
A stone is silent, and offendeth not,
For such a sight will blind a father's eye:
Then pardon me for reprehending thee,
See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee:
And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.
My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak.
Say that the emperor requests a parley
An 'twere my case, I should go hang myself.
He would not then have touch'd them for his life!
Go, get you gone, and pray be careful all,
And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.
'Tis good, sir: you are very short with us,
This siren, that will charm Rome's Saturnine,
Now climbeth Tamora Olympus' top,
Aaron, it must, the mother wills it so.
Thee never, nor thy traitorous haughty sons,
Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it?
young days. Why, I am going with my pigeons to the
God be with you, sir, I will.
Ay, sir.
And tapers burn so bright and every thing
Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome!
That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?
Look round about the wicked streets of Rome,
Was ever Scythia half so barbarous?
But I'll deceive you in another sort,
You must perforce accomplish as you may.
With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies,
And will o'erreach them in their own devices:
You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends.
Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.
And bid him come and banquet at thy house,
Replying shrilly to the well-tuned horns,
Than is Prometheus tied to Caucasus.
Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius,
Thy hand once more, I will not loose again,
My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,
I hold me highly honour'd of your grace:
Which that sweet tongue hath made,
And swear with me, as, with the woful fere
Citing my worthless praise: O, pardon me,
Flourish. SATURNINUS and BASSIANUS go up into the Capitol
What, wouldst thou have me prove myself a bastard?
No big-boned men framed of the Cyclops' size,
That thou wilt never render to me more!
Enter MARCUS ANDRONICUS, aloft, with the crown
SCENE II. Rome. Before TITUS's house.
Acts of black night, abominable deeds,
Thy other banish'd son, with this dear sight
In peace and honour live Lord Titus long,
By him that justly may
They told me, here, at dead time of the night,
The last true duties of thy noble son!
And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.
For all the frosty nights that I have watch'd,
Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
'And shall!' what villain was it that spake
Do him that kindness, and take leave of him.
Pattern'd by that the poet here describes,
No vast obscurity or misty vale,
Thou shalt not sigh, nor hold thy stumps to heaven,
Come, let us go, and make thy father blind,
From thousand dangers, bid him bury it
This is a witness that I am thy son.
Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths,
And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
Give me thy knife, I will insult on him,
He is not with himself, let us withdraw.
With secrets.
And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens
Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms.
No funeral rite, nor man m mourning weeds,
Good Rapine, stab him, he's a ravisher.
When I have walked like a private man,
For they have fought for Rome, and all in vain,
PUBLIUS,  and c. lay hold on CHIRON and DEMETRIUS
Mine honour's ensigns humbled at thy feet.
That cursed Chiron and Demetrius
Your reason, mighty lord?
Thou hast the odds of me, therefore no more.
May run into that sink, and soaking in
If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful
She is deliver'd, lords, she is deliver'd.
Come, go with me into mine armoury,
The complot of this timeless tragedy,
So thou refuse to drink my dear sons' blood.
Thy sons make pillage of her chastity
The dam will wake, and, if she wind you once,
Enter AARON
Such violent hands upon her tender life.
If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,
A ladder brought, which AARON is made to ascend
Enter DEMETRIUS and CHIRON
Uncle Marcus, since it is my father's mind
This is the pearl that pleased your empress' eye,
And, whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,
This sandy plot is plain, guide, if thou canst
Madam, depart at pleasure, leave us here.
The tomb is opened
I'll find a day to massacre them all
What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?
This petty brabble will undo us all.
Sirrah, hast thou a knife? come, let me see it.
The cause were known to them it most concerns,
Thou art a Roman, be not barbarous:
And I will be revenged on them all.
Kissing TITUS
You heavy people, circle me about,
O, do not learn her wrath, she taught it thee,
And wherein Rome hath done you any scath,
Knock at his study, where, they say, he keeps,
Arm, arm, my lord,--Rome never had more cause.
He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed
He'll so awake as she in fury shall
That have their alms out of the empress' chest.
My truth-betrothed love and now my wife?
So Tamora:
To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.
And must advise the emperor for his good.
And hid the gold within the letter mention'd,
Tam lentus audis scelera? tam lentus vides?
They would not pity me, yet plead I must,
Lest we remember still that we have none.
And welcome, all: although the cheer be poor,
And they have served me to effectless use:
Chiron, thy years want wit, thy wit wants edge,
Speak, Queen of Goths, dost thou applaud my choice?
Rend off thy silver hair, thy other hand
These are their brethren, whom you Goths beheld
Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears:
O gentle Aaron, we are all undone!
Speak, gentle niece, what stern ungentle hands
For I must talk of murders, rapes and massacres,
Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,
Cornelia the midwife and myself,
A stone is soft as wax,--tribunes more hard than stones,
But to your wishes' height advance you both.
I am as woful as Virginius was,
When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.
Weke, weke! so cries a pig prepared to the spit.
Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell:
Is not thy coming for my other hand?
Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine,
For I have heard my grandsire say full oft,
By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
Here grow no damned grudges, here are no storms,
Do not draw back, for we will mourn with thee
Nay, nay, sweet emperor, we must all be friends:
It was my deer, and he that wounded her
Follow, my lord, and I'll soon bring her back.
Rome's readiest champions, repose you here in rest,
Aaron, a thousand deaths
My son and I will have the wind of you:
Soft! who comes here?
the babe,--
Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness.
Tell on thy mind, I say thy child shall live.
With all his threatening band of Typhon's brood,
That shall distil from these two ancient urns,
Cousin, a word, where is your husband?
A devil.
But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,
Hadst thou in person ne'er offended me,
Fie, brother, fie! teach her not thus to lay
Hark, wretches! how I mean to martyr you.
Behold the poor remains, alive and dead!
More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.
Father, and in that name doth nature speak,--
That, on mine honour, here I do protest.
'Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.'
Why have I patience to endure all this?
Fair Philomela, she but lost her tongue,
What says Andronicus to this device?
Unworthy brother, and unworthy sons!
That you will be more mild and tractable.
But in oblivion and hateful griefs.
To join with him and right his heinous wrongs.
My rapier in his bosom and withal
First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl,
As true a dog as ever fought at head.
Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin,
O villains, Chiron and Demetrius!
With folded arms. This poor right hand of mine
Ambitiously for rule and empery,
Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?
And just against thy heart make thou a hole,
I heard a child cry underneath a wall.
Wherein I did not some notorious ill,
Rape, call you it, my lord, to seize my own,
A deed of death done on the innocent
And set abroad new business for you all?
Where I espied the panther fast asleep.
How furious and impatient they be,
Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter, I never drank with him
The emperor himself and all thy foes,
Rise, Marcus, rise.
To attend the emperor's person carefully:
Was there none else in Rome to make a stale,
He takes false shadows for true substances.
I will most thankful be, and thanks to men
Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream
Into this gaping hollow of the earth?
My sword, my chariot and my prisoners,
Of old Andronicus. And what an if
Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.
But, lovely niece, that mean is cut from thee,
Accuse some innocent and forswear myself,
Why, so, brave lords! when we join in league,
And manners, to intrude where I am graced,
Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?
Writing destruction on the enemy's castle?
So, trouble me no more, but get you gone.
Faint-hearted boy, arise, and look upon her.
Would I perform, if I might have my will,
And led my country's strength successfully,
Enter MARCUS
Enter TITUS, MARCUS, LAVINIA and Young LUCIUS, a boy
Good Aaron, wilt thou help to chop it off?
This day all quarrels die, Andronicus,
And therefore, lovely Tamora, queen of Goths,
And make proud Saturnine and his empress
Rise, Titus, rise, my empress hath prevail'd.
The other rotted with delicious feed.
See, brother, see, note how she quotes the leaves.
Which overshades the mouth of that same pit
O reverend tribunes! O gentle, aged men!
No, madam, these are no venereal signs:
Then must my sea be moved with her sighs,
Do this, and be a charitable murderer.
LAVINIA kisses TITUS
Friends, that have been thus forward in my right,
[Coming forward]  Why, how now, lords!
Gallops the zodiac in his glistering coach,
Our enemies' pride: five times he hath return'd
The eagle suffers little birds to sing,
Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them!
Where we decreed to bury Bassianus.
A valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy,
To him that flourish'd for her with his sword
How many sons of mine hast thou in store,
But, Titus, I have touched thee to the quick,
But let her rest in her unrest awhile.
And at my lovely Tamora's entreats,
And with thy weapon nothing darest perform!
And blazoning our injustice every where?
Before this earthy prison of their bones,
Yet, I think, we are not brought so low,
For nature puts me to a heavy task:
That died by law for murder of our brother,
The forest walks are wide and spacious,
And, for our father's sake and mother's care,
To it, boy! Marcus, loose when I bid.
Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor.
And to be doubted that your Moor and you
in all my life.
As who would say, in Rome no justice were.
Kind Rome, that hast thus lovingly reserved
Enter a Messenger, with two heads and a hand
No grace? no womanhood? Ah, beastly creature!
And, had you not by wondrous fortune come,
Cannot induce you to attend my words,
If any power pities wretched tears,
The people will accept whom he admits.
And with our swords, upon a pile of wood,
And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue,
Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.
For, by my soul, were there worse end than death,
The eldest son of this distressed queen.
And, being credulous in this mad thought,
Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say
Who threats, in course of this revenge, to do
For 'tis not life that I have begg'd so long,
Ay, for these slips have made him noted long:
Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear:
I pray thee, do on them some violent death,
Farewell Andronicus, my noble father,
Here Aaron is, and what with Aaron now?
And, as I earnestly did fix mine eye
How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths
The fields are fragrant and the woods are green:
Or, had he heard the heavenly harmony
Go thou with them, and in the emperor's court
A sight to vex the father's soul withal.
To that I call!
SCENE II. A room in Titus's house. A banquet set out.
Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?
However these disturbers of our peace
And arm the minds of infants to exclaims.
Aside
Princely shall be thy usage every way.
O barbarous, beastly villains, like thyself!
O, had we never, never hunted there!--
This was the sport, my lord: when Publius shot,
Because she was enforced, stain'd, and deflower'd?
Exit
Sirs, strive no more: such wither'd herbs as these
My fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls
And name thee in election for the empire,
For valiant doings in their country's cause?
The story of that baleful burning night
When it should move you to attend me most,
Is left to tyrannize upon my breast,
Makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate:
I render, for my brethren's obsequies,
What time I threw the people's suffrages
Good uncle Marcus, see how swift she comes.
Doth weep to see his grandsire's heaviness.
'Peace, tawny slave, half me and half thy dam!
Look by and by to have thy sons with thee.
That so my sad decrees may fly away,
O brother, with the dismall'st object hurt
And of the paste a coffin I will rear
Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome.
Re-enter MARCUS, LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS
I may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb
Why dost not comfort me, and help me out
Thrice noble Titus, spare my first-born son.
Peace, villain, peace!'--even thus he rates
King and commander of our commonweal,
Ten thousand swelling toads, as many urchins,
To do some fatal execution?
And prompt me, that my tongue may utter forth
Kills TAMORA
And, notwithstanding all this loss of blood,
Their mother's bed-chamber should not be safe
Sweet father, cease your tears, for, at your grief,
Ransomless here we set our prisoners free:
Bid him farewell, commit him to the grave,
I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus,
And climb the highest promontory top.
Per Styga, per manes vehor.
And when thou hast given it the emperor,
Not so, my lord, the gods of Rome forfend
A long flourish till they come down
She is a woman, therefore may be woo'd,
Be barr'd his entrance here.
My grandsire, well advised, hath sent by me
Lavinia, come. Marcus, look to my house:
Come on, you thick lipp'd slave, I'll bear you hence,
Lucius, I will.
Had I the power that some say Dian had,
Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,
come to him, at the first approach you must kneel,
I love Lavinia more than all the world.
That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.
Dies
Revenge it, as you love your mother's life,
Then cheer thy spirit : for know, thou emperor,
Hark, villains! I will grind your bones to dust
And now I find it, therefore bind them sure,
And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape:
And let the emperor dandle him for his own.
Now will I to the Goths, and raise a power,
Yet have I heard,--O, could I find it now!--
Unfurnish'd of her well-beseeming troop?
Romans, do me right:
Ruthful to hear, yet piteously perform'd:
And then I'll come and be thy waggoner,
That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.
Shall I endure this monstrous villany?
What should I don this robe, and trouble you?
How I have govern'd our determined jest?
She swooned almost at my pleasing tale,
There is enough written upon this earth
A barren detested vale, you see it is,
Titus, when wert thou wont to walk alone,
Enter TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, and CHIRON, disguised
And basely put it up without revenge?
And what is written shall be executed.
Of egal justice, used in such contempt?
A mother's tears in passion for her son:
Will send thee hither both thy sons alive,
Bid him repair to me, and bring with him
Fair lords, your fortunes are alike in all,
Here is a captain, let him tell the tale,
Keep there: now talk at pleasure of your safety.
And yet detested life not shrink thereat!
Look, sirs, if you can find the huntsman out
Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the empery.
Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.
The hope of Rome, for so he bade me say,
Gave you a dancing-rapier by your side,
Enter, from one side, AARON, DEMETRIUS, and  CHIRON, from the other side, Young LUCIUS, and an  Attendant, with a bundle of weapons, and verses writ upon them
For that they will not intercept my tale:
That, with his sons, a terror to our foes,
Lavinia, how say you?
Thou canst not come to me: I come to thee.
To CHIRON
And cannot brook competitors in love?
This valley fits the purpose passing well.
Go thou with him, and when it is thy hap
Whose friend in justice thou hast ever been,
As when the golden sun salutes the morn,
How they are stain'd, as meadows, yet not dry,
Thy husband he is dead: and for his death
But floods of tears will drown my oratory,
Go home, call for sweet water, wash thy hands.
But give them to his master for a present.
Had I but seen thy picture in this plight,
Witness the tiring day and heavy night,
Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,
And faster bound to Aaron's charming eyes
To beg relief among Rome's enemies:
Even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny.
And pierce the inmost centre of the earth:
And gratulate his safe return to Rome,
And now like Nilus, it disdaineth bounds.
And will create thee empress of Rome,
To appease their groaning shadows that are gone.
But welcome, as you are. What shall we do?
Fear not thy sons, they shall do well enough.
And that it comes from old Andronicus,
Many a matter hath he told to thee,
Ye white-limed walls! ye alehouse painted signs!
What would you say, if I should let you speak?
To be dishonour'd by my sons in Rome!
Be bold in us: we'll follow where thou lead'st,
Exit
And send it to the king: he for the same
Nay, come, agree whose hand shall go along,
Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds:
That I have reconciled your friends and you.
To achieve her! how?
Enter a Clown, with a basket, and two pigeons in it
And bid that strumpet, your unhallow'd dam,
To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.
And would not, but in fury, fright my youth:
Lord Junius Brutus sware for Lucrece' rape,
Whom worthily you would have now succeed.
Ay, come, Semiramis, nay, barbarous Tamora,
O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye,
I do repent it from my very soul.
Ay, noble Titus, and resolved withal
Of that true hand that fought Rome's quarrel out,
Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit.
O most insatiate and luxurious woman!
What, hast not thou full often struck a doe,
Great reason that my noble lord be rated
Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.
The trees, though summer, yet forlorn and lean,
How Troy was burnt and he made miserable?
Exeunt TITUS, MARCUS, and LAVINIA
The midwife and the nurse well made away,
I read it in the grammar long ago.
the emperor from you.
But Saturnine? Full well, Andronicus,
They never do beget a coal-black calf.
I give thee thanks in part of thy deserts,
How easily murder is discovered!
I'll make him send for Lucius his son,
Whiles hounds and horns and sweet melodious birds
Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,
Lucius, I'll fit thee, and withal, my boy,
Will we acquaint with all that we intend,
But would it please thee, good Andronicus,
But thou art deeper read, and better skill'd
And no one else but the deliver'd empress.
I have dogs, my lord,
MARCUS strikes the dish with a knife
I will not hear her speak, away with her!
Among the nettles at the elder-tree
Receive him, then, to favor, Saturnine,
So I might have your company in hell,
Read to her sons than she hath read to thee
Dead, if you will, but not to be his wife,
Cuts off TITUS's hand
[Aside]  Pray to the devils, the gods have given us over.
Bear thou my hand, sweet wench, between thy teeth.
And tell them both the circumstance of all,
By nature made for murders and for rapes.
Alas, a crimson river of warm blood,
Look, how the black slave smiles upon the father,
Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus?
And stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds
Bring down the devil, for he must not die
My foes I do repute you every one,
ACT II
Let it be so, and let Andronicus
The unhappy son of old Andronicus:
Because I would be sure to have all well,
Here stands my other son, a banished man,
Our empress' shame, and stately Rome's disgrace!
Mine eyes are cloy'd with view of tyranny:
Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.
'Tis you must dig with mattock and with spade,
Than baits to fish, or honey-stalks to sheep,
I ask your voices and your suffrages:
To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
That ever ear did hear to such effect:
Say, wall-eyed slave, whither wouldst thou convey
Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grandsire.
My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,
Patience, Prince Saturninus.
His wife but yesternight was brought to bed,
SCENE I. Rome. Before the Capitol.
Away with him! and make a fire straight,
The wofull'st man that ever lived in Rome:
Make poor men's cattle break their necks,
Full well I wot the ground of all this grudge:
Seeking to hide herself, as doth the deer
Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.
Shed on the earth, for thy return to Rome:
Some loving friends convey the emperor hence,
In peace and honour rest you here, my sons!
Makes way, and run like swallows o'er the plain.
Yield at entreats, and then let me alone:
There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,
Why, tis no matter, man, if they did hear,
Why, there it goes: God give his lordship joy!
But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?
Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,
What boots it thee to call thyself a sun?
LUCIUS, MARCUS, and the others descend
What would she find? Lavinia, shall I read?
Perchance she weeps because they kill'd her husband,
My lord, look here: look here, Lavinia:
What mean'st thou, Aaron? wherefore didst thou this?
How, sir! are you in earnest then, my lord?
Exit, guarded
And revel in Lavinia's treasury.
The Bull, being gall'd, gave Aries such a knock
And, uncle, so will I, an if I live.
See, lord and father, how we have perform'd
Exeunt the followers of SATURNINUS
I say, no,
Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius?
but friends,
And in a tedious sampler sew'd her mind:
And let me say, that never wept before,
SCENE I. Rome. A street.
Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter
'Tis not the difference of a year or two
Lavinia, thou shalt be employ'd: these arms!
Advanced above pale envy's threatening reach.
Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?
Performers of this heinous, bloody deed?
That blabb'd them with such pleasing eloquence,
Uncouple here and let us make a bay
Nay, then I'll stop your mouth. Bring thou her husband:
It was, Andronicus.
These that I bring unto their latest home,
Even for his sake am I pitiless.
Why makest thou it so strange?
Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,
Agree between you, I will spare my hand.
When subtle Greeks surprised King Priam's Troy,
Rome could afford no tribune like to these.
Ay, now begin our sorrows to approach:
For me, most wretched, to perform the like.
Confer with me of murder and of death:
Ravish'd and wrong'd, as Philomela was,
Whose fortunes Rome's best citizens applaud!
To-morrow, an it please your majesty
And who should find them but the empress' villain?
Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.
I know from whence this same device proceeds:
Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt,
The common voice do cry it shall be so.
And you of yours, my lord! I say no more,
Away, and talk not, trouble us no more.
Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend!
I blush to think upon this ignomy.
And threat me I shall never come to bliss
Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth.
A father and a friend to thee and Rome.
We know not where you left him all alive,
And set them upright at their dear friends' doors,
Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee.
A special party, have, by common voice,
And be my heart an ever-burning hell!
O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping,
Unless the nightly owl or fatal raven:
As he regards his aged father's life.
Alas, poor heart, that kiss is comfortless
What, man! more water glideth by the mill
Romans, forget your fealty to me.
I am a lamb: but if you brave the Moor,
I lead espoused my bride along with me.
Renowned Titus, more than half my soul,--
And she shall file our engines with advice,
Although she lave them hourly in the flood.
To lay a complot to betray thy foes.
Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consumed.
'Tis well, Lavinia, that thou hast no hands,
That hath aspired to Solon's happiness
Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot-wheels,
Gnawing with thy teeth, and be this dismal sight
As frozen water to a starved snake.
His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness?
Make way to lay them by their brethren.
And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone.
Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things
for up and down she doth resemble thee:
And bear it from me to the empress.
And buzz lamenting doings in the air!
Unless the gods delight in tragedies?
To use as you think needful of the man.
Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy.
And hast a thing within thee called conscience,
And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.
Then is all safe, the anchor's in the port.
A very fatal place it seems to me.
See here in bloody lines I have set down,
Shall not be sent: my hand will serve the turn:
Come hither purposely to poison me.--
You are but newly planted in your throne,
Titus, prepare thy aged eyes to weep,
Enter MARCUS
Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst our ancestor,
Yea, forsooth, an your mistership be emperial.
My lord, this is impiety in you:
Or, at the least, make them his enemies.
That ever eye with sight made heart lament!
And that you'll say, ere half an hour pass.
SCENE I. Rome. Before the Palace.
Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me,
LAVINIA turns over with her stumps the books which LUCIUS has let fall
Aside
O'ercome with moss and baleful mistletoe:
And leave me to this miserable death:
Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so,
Led by their master to the flowered fields,
That I will here dismiss my loving friends,
And you recount your sorrows to a stone.
To prove thou hast a true-divining heart,
And tarry with him till I turn again.
Alas, sweet aunt, I know not what you mean.
There is a queen, attended by a Moor,
And now prepare your throats. Lavinia, come,
Why, foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive
Even as an adder when she doth unroll
I do remit these young men's heinous faults: Stand up.
And lay it by: the angry northern wind
Hie to the Goths, and raise an army there:
Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we
Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity
She says she drinks no other drink but tears,
O, keep me from their worse than killing lust,
Also stabs BASSIANUS, who dies
Hath ordain'd to an honourable end,
And see them ready 'gainst their mother comes.
Two of her brothers were condemn'd to death,
Come, come, thou'lt do thy message, wilt thou not?
Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.
As kill a man, or else devise his death,
He that would vouch it in any place but here.
And, with these boys, mine honour thou hast wounded:
Aaron, thou hast hit it.
And nothing grieves me heartily indeed
This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil,
And by still practise learn to know thy meaning.
This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,
Rome's royal mistress, mistress of my heart,
Thy counsel, lad, smells of no cowardice,
Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge,
And bring our emperor gently in thy hand,
Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands,
Repose in fame, none basely slain in brawls:
Thy life-blood out: if Aaron now be wise,
Then, if you will elect by my advice,
The effects of sorrow for his valiant sons,
'Tis sure enough, an you knew how.
And many unfrequented plots there are
You are a young huntsman, Marcus, let it alone,
Should drive upon thy new-transformed limbs,
But not a sceptre to control the world:
Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.
Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care
[Aside]  I know them all, though they suppose me mad,
But send the midwife presently to me.
There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed!
And bury all thy fear in my devices.
And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad:
But I of these will wrest an alphabet
Aloud
Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON
Whose smoke, like incense, doth perfume the sky.
Demetrius, thou dost over-ween in all,
Exit
And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,
To make this banquet, which I wish may prove
And leave you not a man-of-war unsearch'd:
That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully,
What, is Lavinia then become so loose,
Whom you pretend to honour and adore,
I pry'd me through the crevice of a wall
Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.
AEmilius, do this message honourably:
Of her two branches, those sweet ornaments,
If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous things,
Dismiss your followers and, as suitors should,
O detestable villain! call'st thou that trimming?
Shall thy good uncle, and thy brother Lucius,
And with that painted hope braves your mightiness:
And fame's eternal date, for virtue's praise!
To entertain your highness and your empress.
To whom I sued for my dear son's life,
No more, great empress, Bassianus comes:
Which is it, girl, of these? Open them, boy.
The wide world's emperor, do I consecrate
Join with the Goths, and with revengeful war
That woe is me to think upon thy woes
She is a woman, therefore may be won,
Hear me, grave fathers! noble tribunes, stay!
Hark Tamora, the empress of my soul,
Is he sure bound? look that you bind them fast.
Re-enter LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS and MUTIUS, with their swords bloody
That slew himself, and wise Laertes' son
Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong,
Some devil whisper curses in mine ear,
And make them blind with tributary tears:
Receive them then, the tribute that I owe,
Or is it Dian, habited like her,
The venomous malice of my swelling heart!
And thou, and I, sit round about some fountain,
Let us sit down and mark their yelping noise,
And give him burial in his father's grave:
Aaron will have his soul black like his face.
Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.
This way to death my wretched sons are gone,
For thou, poor man, hast drown'd it with thine own.
And not relent, or not compassion him?
That all the court may echo with the noise.
By my advice, all humbled on your knees,
That I would choose, were I to choose anew.
Be unto us as is a nurse's song
Marcus, we will.
She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash,
For shame, be friends, and join for that you jar:
Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.
Tremble, like aspen-leaves, upon a lute,
To make us wonder'd at in time to come.
And he hath cut those pretty fingers off,
Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks,
If one good deed in all my life I did,
Successful in the battles that he fights,
Somewhat too early for new-married ladies.
In summer's drought I'll drop upon thee still,
Nurse, give it me, my sword shall soon dispatch it.
And say I am Revenge, sent from below
Hath yoked a nation strong, train'd up in arms.
Which of your hands hath not defended Rome,
'Stuprum. Chiron. Demetrius.'
Know you these two?
And maintain such a quarrel openly?
Sirrah, what tidings? have you any letters?
Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit
There will the lovely Roman ladies troop:
Can never turn the swan's black legs to white,
He by the senate is accit'd home
I know not, Marcus, but I know it is,
He gives them the arrows
O gracious emperor! O gentle Aaron!
Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec arcu.'
Sweet lords, entreat her hear me but a word.
From weary wars against the barbarous Goths,
Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.
Good boy, in Virgo's lap, give it Pallas.
I will embrace thee in it by and by.
Will rouse the proudest panther in the chase,
That nice-preserved honesty of yours.
Away, inhuman dog! unhallow'd slave!
By whom our heavy haps had their beginning:
Then, at my suit, look graciously on him,
That both mine eyes were rainy like to his :
His child is like to her, fair as you are:
By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes.
We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.
These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
Cursed be that heart that forced us to this shift!
Which I have sumptuously re-edified:
The birds chant melody on every bush,
Captives, to be advanced to this height?
No, let them satisfy their lust on thee.
For good Lord Titus' innocence in all,
Reflect on Rome as Titan's rays on earth,
That like events may ne'er it ruinate.
Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses,
What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife?
Perchance because she knows them innocent.
And now, young lords, was't not a happy star
My lords, with all the humbleness I may,
Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch'd our ears,
Nor would your noble mother for much more
This closing with him fits his lunacy
A long-tongued babbling gossip? no, lords, no:
Witness these trenches made by grief and care,
Lord Bassianus lies embrewed here,
Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,
Why, boy, although our mother, unadvised,
Patience, dear niece. Good Titus, dry thine eyes.
I have been troubled in my sleep this night,
For this care of Tamora,
Chiron, we hunt not, we, with horse nor hound,
O, be to me, though thy hard heart say no,
Enter TITUS dressed like a Cook, LAVINIA veiled,  Young LUCIUS, and others. TITUS places the dishes on the table
These that survive let Rome reward with love,
Foul-spoken coward, that thunder'st with thy tongue,
To calm this tempest whirling in the court,
In winter with warm tears I'll melt the snow
Show me a villain that hath done a rape,
For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome:
Sirs, stop his mouth, and let him speak no more.
The people's hearts, and wean them from themselves.
Be so dishonour'd in the court of Rome.
My lovely Aaron, wherefore look'st thou sad,
And this for me, struck home to show my strength.
And so I love and honour thee and thine,
Hautboys sound. The Company sit down at table
Confederate in the fact: ay, more there was,
What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?
For villains mark'd with rape.--May it please you,
That comes in likeness of a coal-black Moor.
Welcome, dread Fury, to my woful house:
'Tis he. God and Saint Stephen give you good den:
And find out murderers in their guilty caves:
But say, again, how many saw the child?
See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns.
Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.
A goodly lady, trust me, of the hue
O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor?
I am as able and as fit as thou
O noble father, you lament in vain:
Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest.
Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood:
Ay me, this object kills me!
Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst,
Why, then, it seems, some certain snatch or so
[Aside]  Clubs, clubs! these lovers will not keep
I found a friend, and sure as death I swore
Stabbing MUTIUS
To hunt the panther and the hart with me,
Yet there's as little justice as at land:
Could not all hell afford you such a devil?
To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts
Thrust these reproachful speeches down his throat
Than youthful April shall with all his showers:
Should straight fall mad, or else die suddenly.
Till thou art here aloft, or I below:
Patricians, draw your swords: and sheathe them not
slain thee,
then kiss his foot, then deliver up your pigeons, and
Let's see,
Aaron, what shall I say unto the empress?
Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.
Her life was beast-like, and devoid of pity,
Hanged! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck to
If I do wake, some planet strike me down,
Aside
When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air
Environed with a wilderness of sea,
Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power,
Ah, now no more will I control thy griefs:
O, thus I found her, straying in the park,
And wander'd hither to an obscure plot,
By this device.
Set fire on barns and hay-stacks in the night,
Upon his bloody finger he doth wear
Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.
What if I do not? as, indeed, I do not,
Then, madam, stand resolved, but hope withal
And mine, I promise you, were't not for shame,
Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.
Whose circling shadows kings have sought to sleep in,
The hunt is up, the morn is bright and grey,
To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,
But if you hunt these bear-whelps, then beware:
Then into limits could I bind my woes:
Was it well done of rash Virginius
Well hast thou lesson'd us, this shall we do.
That granted, how canst thou believe an oath?
Your lordships, that, whenever you have need,
Why dost not speak? what, deaf? not a word?
Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears.
Will blow these sands, like Sibyl's leaves, abroad,
So, Bassianus, you have play'd your prize:
But sorrow flouted at is double death.
Safe out of fortune's shot, and sits aloft,
And feed his humour kindly as we may,
Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
DEMETRIUS throws the body of BASSIANUS into the  pit, then exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, dragging off LAVINIA
What shall we do? let us, that have our tongues,
Nor thou, nor he, are any sons of mine,
O, could our mourning ease thy misery!
Here, Tamora, though grieved with killing grief.
Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years,
For his ungrateful country done the like.
Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal emperor!
When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam?
Even in their throats that have committed them.
And tears will quickly melt thy life away.
Some say that ravens foster forlorn children,
Will in his brinish bowels swallow him.
The issue of an irreligious Moor,
No, my good lord, but Pluto sends you word,
In right and service of their noble country
If ever Bassianus, Caesar's son,
O, had the monster seen those lily hands
bloody kind,
And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains,
I made unto the noise, when soon I heard
And secretly to greet the empress' friends.
A goodly humour, is it not, my lords?
My gracious lord, here is the bag of gold.
The Goths have gather'd head, and with a power
I would not for a million of gold
With opportunity of sharp revenge
Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
These wrongs, unspeakable, past patience,
Enter SATURNINUS, TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON,  Lords, and others, SATURNINUS with the arrows in his hand that TITUS shot
Come, mistress, now perforce we will enjoy
deliver a supplication?
Nor wrong mine age with this indignity.
People of Rome, and people's tribunes here,
Are singled forth to try experiments:
So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus
Not far, one Muli lives, my countryman,
Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court:
For worse than Philomel you used my daughter,
And now at last, laden with horror's spoils,
Exeunt LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS, and MUTIUS, with ALARBUS
And rouse the prince and ring a hunter's peal,
Complots of mischief, treason, villanies
then look for your reward. I'll be at hand, sir, see
Dissemble all your griefs and discontents:
Thy griefs their sports, thy resolution mock'd,
Now will I hence about thy business,
Ah, sirrah!
A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant,
As fresh as morning dew distill'd on flowers?
But honour thee, and will do till I die:
An if your highness knew my heart, you were.
Then here is a supplication for you. And when you
Exit TAMORA
My heart is not compact of flint nor steel,
Would you had hit it too!
Ay, just, a verse in Horace, right, you have it.
One hour's storm will drown the fragrant meads,
But me more good, to see so great a lord
Give me thy poniard, you shall know, my boys
Accursed if the fault be proved in them,--
Did you not use his daughter very friendly?
And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter:
Come, and take choice of all my library,
That will not suffer you to square yourselves,
Fie, Publius, fie! thou art too much deceived,
That hath thrown down so many enemies,
Do, then, dear heart, for heaven shall hear our prayers,
And you, the empress! but we worldly men
But straight they told me they would bind me here
Madam, though Venus govern your desires,
Enter TITUS ANDRONICUS, with Hunters,  and c., MARCUS, LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS
And, after conflict such as was supposed
Content thee, prince, I will restore to thee
Our Roman rites: Alarbus' limbs are lopp'd,
Enter a Goth, leading AARON with his Child in his arms
My lord, I know not, I, nor can I guess,
And sent her enemies unto the grave.
Brew'd with her sorrow, mesh'd upon her cheeks:
Exeunt LUCIUS and MARCUS
Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.
But that I cannot do ten thousand more.
Dishonour'd thus, and challenged of wrongs?
And, with thy shame, thy father's sorrow die!
For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded,
Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand,
That highly may advantage thee to hear:
But where the bull and cow are both milk-white,
Come on, then, horse and chariots let us have,
Meet and agreeing with thine infancy,
To LUCIUS
Till time beget some careful remedy.
As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth.
Tribunes, I thank you: and this suit I make,
'Zounds, ye whore! is black so base a hue?
Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs,
MARCUS and the Sons of TITUS kneel
And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.
The dismall'st day is this that e'er I saw,
My sons' sweet blood will make it shame and blush.
Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered:
I go, Andronicus: and for thy hand
With voices and applause of every sort,
Which made me down to throw my books, and fly--
And raze their faction and their family,
MUTIUS is put into the tomb
O, why should nature build so foul a den,
I warrant you, sir, let me alone.
Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent,
That noble-minded Titus means to thee!
They draw
Go to, have your lath glued within your sheath
And so in this, to bear me down with braves.
And shall, or him we will accompany.
I beg this boon, with tears not lightly shed,
Titus Andronicus, for thy favors done
Sweet huntsman, Bassianus 'tis we mean--
Whiles I go tell my lord the emperor
'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,
Than this Lavinia, Bassianus' love.
ACT IV
Here's no sound jest! the old man hath found their guilt,
That touches this my first-born son and heir!
Mark, Marcus, mark! I understand her signs:
Give me a sword, I'll chop off my hands too,
And to our sport.
Although my seal be stamped in his face.
Now all the service I require of them
'Ad Martem,' that's for myself:
Come, come, sweet emperor, come, Andronicus,
These broken limbs again into one body,
My hand hath been but idle, let it serve
Answer I must and shall do with my life.
Fear her not, Lucius: somewhat doth she mean:
It were convenient you had such a devil:
As punishment for his most wicked life.
They sit
But now nor Lucius nor Lavinia lives
Than foemen's marks upon his batter'd shield,
The tribunes hear you not, no man is by,
Not I, till I have sheathed
O Tamora! thou bear'st a woman's face,--
Where is my lord the king?
Young lords, beware! and should the empress know
That he hath breathed in my dishonour here.
And pray the Roman gods confound you both!
Marcus Andronicus, so I do ally
The one is Murder, Rape is the other's name,
Thy brothers are condemn'd, and dead by this.
Is of a sudden thus advanced in Rome?
Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine!
But fierce Andronicus would not relent,
And we will come. March away.
From whence at first she weigh'd her anchorage,
He can at pleasure stint their melody:
We do, and vow to heaven and to his highness,
Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,
To bury so much gold under a tree,
The emperor's court is like the house of Fame,
But that between us we can kill a fly
Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey-dew
Princes, that strive by factions and by friends
The wandering prince and Dido once enjoy'd,
Struck pale and bloodless, and thy brother, I,
An emperor in Rome thus overborne,
Exit
As much as ever Coriolanus did.
Enter TITUS, bearing arrows with letters at the  ends of them, with him, MARCUS, Young LUCIUS,  PUBLIUS, SEMPRONIUS, CAIUS, and other Gentlemen, with bows
Stand all aloof: but, uncle, draw you near,
Shed yet some small drops from thy tender spring,
O, that delightful engine of her thoughts
That you create your emperor's eldest son,
SCENE III. The same. A public place.
Speak, Lavinia, what accursed hand
To whom?
Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee:
To slay his daughter with his own right hand,
Hath hurt me more than had he killed me dead:
And, whilst the babbling echo mocks the hounds,
Enter AEMILIUS
The snake lies rolled in the cheerful sun,
Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all my life.
Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,
Therefore, away with her, and use her as you will,
There's for thyself, and that's for Tamora.
Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing
Why, are ye mad? or know ye not, in Rome
I think she means that there was more than one
To gratify your honourable youth,
Nor I no strength to climb without thy help.
From this unhallowed and blood-stained hole?
[To TITUS]  Two of thy whelps, fell curs of
So near the emperor's palace dare you draw,
Did ever raven sing so like a lark,
Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.
As jewels purchased at an easy price,
But I will use the axe.
And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.
And here my brother, weeping at my woes.
My sons would never so dishonour me:
See, here's to Jove, and this to Mercury,
They would not mark me, or if they did mark,
Upon a just survey, take Titus' part,
During the fray, SATURNINUS, TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON and AARON go out and re-enter, above
Draw near them then in being merciful:
And take my ministers along with me.
Patient yourself, madam, and pardon me.
Thou art an exile, and thou must not stay:
Then be my passions bottomless with them.
Now, masters, draw.
Exit
Enter DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, braving
Bury him where you can, he comes not here.
Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the emperor
Here are the heads of thy two noble sons,
[Aside]  That you are both decipher'd, that's the news,
Youngling, learn thou to make some meaner choice:
And make them know what 'tis to let a queen
Extremity of griefs would make men mad,
Will use you nobly and your followers.
Now help, or woe betide thee evermore!
And wash their hands in Bassianus' blood.
Or else I will discover nought to thee.
Enter BASSIANUS and LAVINIA
And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope,
And she whom mighty kingdoms court'sy to,
I should repent the evils I have done:
My everlasting doom of banishment.
Would I were dead, so you did live again!
This is the pit, and this the elder-tree.
Nay, he is your brother by the surer side,
He leaves his pledges dearer than his life:
My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon,
He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.
Give sentence on this execrable wretch,
If Marcus did not name the word of hands!
Why, sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for
Why should you fear? is not your city strong?
Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths?
Shall I speak for thee? shall I say 'tis so?
'Ad Jovem,' that's for you: here, 'Ad Apollinem:'
How fair the tribune speaks to calm my thoughts!
Was I a child to fear I know not what.
To-morrow yield up rule, resign my life,
Jove shield your husband from his hounds to-day!
But must my sons be slaughter'd in the streets,
Go, go into old Titus' sorrowful house,
And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse:
To bid AEneas tell the tale twice o'er,
No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee
Be closed in our household's monument.
Happily you may catch her in the sea,
Then must my earth with her continual tears
Sirs, take you to your tools. You, cousins, shall
That end upon them should be executed.
And mount her pitch, whom thou in triumph long
Or be ye not henceforth call'd my children.
Now, by the burning tapers of the sky,
Rest on my word, and let not discontent
Upright he held it, lords, that held it last.
My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.
Faith, not me.
Exeunt BASSIANUS and MARCUS with LAVINIA
Like to the empress' Moor, therefore I kill'd him.
And sends them weapons wrapped about with lines,
Have I not reason, think you, to look pale?
Come, Lucius, come, stay not to talk with them.
[To TAMORA]  Now, madam, are you prisoner to
If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath--
Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,
If thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord.
Have with my knife carved in Roman letters,
Believe me, queen, your swarth Cimmerian
SCENE II. The same. A room in the palace.
And rather comfort his distressed plight
Causeless, perhaps. But pardon me, sweet aunt:
And here's the base fruit of his burning lust.
Follows me every where, I know not why:
Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,
Let them not speak a word, the guilt is plain,
To villany and vengeance consecrate,
Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths,
Be candidatus then, and put it on,
O brother, help me with thy fainting hand--
The poor remainder of Andronici
To see her tears, but be your heart to them
your oration, and let him deliver the pigeons to
Re-enter LUCIUS and MARCUS
O, think my son to be as dear to me!
Well, bury him, and bury me the next.
The self-same gods that arm'd the Queen of Troy
That we will prosecute by good advice
With miry slime left on them by a flood?
My lord, kneel down with me, Lavinia, kneel,
Till Saturninus be Rome's emperor.
And plead my passions for Lavinia's love.
Warrants these words in princely courtesy.
Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,
Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them:
To live and burn in everlasting fire,
In that respect, then, like a loving child,
Even from Hyperion's rising in the east
Out of this fell devouring receptacle,
Our pastimes done, possess a golden slumber,
Tell him the emperor and the empress too
All on a heap, like to a slaughter'd lamb,
First know thou, I begot him on the empress.
Doth rise and fall between thy rosed lips,
O, 'tis a verse in Horace, I know it well:
Know, thou sad man, I am not Tamora,
Lucius, save the child,
To send down Justice for to wreak our wrongs.
the peace.
And I have horse will follow where the game
By that same god, what god soe'er it be,
The closing up of our most wretched eyes,
If it be dark, how dost thou know 'tis he?
Threatening the welkin with his big-swoln face?
Troubled, confronted thus, and, for the extent
'Suum cuique' is our Roman justice:
Will it consume me? let me see it, then.
Let him that thinks of me so abjectly
Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius
Inspire me, that I may this treason find!
And, come, I will go get a leaf of brass,
My silence and my cloudy melancholy,
Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones,
Thou know'st our meaning. Look for thy reward
Flourish. Re-enter, from one side, SATURNINUS  attended, TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON and AARON, from the other, BASSIANUS, LAVINIA, and others
Enter TAMORA
Few come within the compass of my curse,--
I am, therefore come down, and welcome me.
King, be thy thoughts imperious, like thy name.
Soft! see how busily she turns the leaves!
To LAVINIA
Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom?
Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.
Knowing that with the shadow of his wings
That my report is just and full of truth.
But even with law, against the willful sons
What, hath the firmament more suns than one?
'Tis thought you have a goodly gift in horning,
Say who art thou that lately didst descend
Speechless complainer, I will learn thy thought,
That I repair to Rome, I am content.
Come, come, be every one officious
Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know:
At that that I have kill'd, my lord, a fly.
As Cerberus at the Thracian poet's feet.
Sit down, sweet niece: brother, sit down by me.
O worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil
And never after to inherit it.
And with a gad of steel will write these words,
Good Lord, how like the empress' sons they are!
highness feed?
Exeunt
And made a brine-pit with our bitter tears?
And now be it known to you my full intent.
The basin that receives your guilty blood.
This is the day of doom for Bassianus:
O, say thou for her, who hath done this deed?
Let fools do good, and fair men call for grace.
O brother, speak with possibilities,
He would have dropp'd his knife, and fell asleep
Now let me show a brother's love to thee.
Are you so desperate grown, to threat your friends?
Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks
Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.
And so I leave you both:
Somewhither would she have thee go with her.
Meanwhile, sir, with the little skill I have,
The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind
Will, hand in hand, all headlong cast us down.
And might not gain so great a happiness
How now! has sorrow made thee dote already?
And at thy mercy shalt they stoop and kneel,
I am the turned forth, be it known to you,
A cry of hounds and horns, winded in a peal. Enter  SATURNINUS, TAMORA, BASSIANUS, LAVINIA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON, and Attendants
Seizing LAVINIA
Not I, my lord, sith true nobility
The villain is alive in Titus' house,
Ah, now thou turn'st away thy face for shame!
Only thus much I give your grace to know:
Welcome, ye warlike Goths, welcome, Lucius,
And worse than Progne I will be revenged:
Then let my father's honours live in me,
The worse to her, the better loved of me.
But, if we live, we'll be as sharp with you.
Spotted, detested, and abominable.
I fear the emperor means no good to us.
But let desert in pure election shine,
Peace, tender sapling, thou art made of tears,
Go, take him away, and hang him presently.
If any one relieves or pities him,
Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.
And welcome, nephews, from successful wars,
Look ye draw home enough, and 'tis there straight.
That hath received some unrecuring wound.
I will not be denied: sweet heart, look back.
Then let the ladies tattle what they please.
Brother, for in that name doth nature plead,--
And that would she for twenty thousand more.
This monument five hundred years hath stood,
And when they show'd me this abhorred pit,
AEmilius, let the emperor give his pledges
Exeunt Goths, with AARON. Flourish within
'Twas her two sons that murder'd Bassianus,
Desires to be admitted to your presence.
In readiness for Hymenaeus stand,
This will I do, and soon return again.
To tremble under Titus' threatening looks.
Enter SATURNINUS and TAMORA, with AEMILIUS, Tribunes, Senators, and others
Unto my father and my uncle Marcus,
What's this but libelling against the senate,
Some book there is that she desires to see.
My noble lord and father, live in fame!
That what you cannot as you would achieve,
Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.
Belike, for joy the emperor hath a son.
Gracious Lavinia, Rome's rich ornament,
And say 'Long live our Emperor Saturnine!'
That like the stately Phoebe 'mongst her nymphs
Single you thither then this dainty doe,
Basely insinuate and send us gifts.
Enter TITUS below
Thou map of woe, that thus dost talk in signs!
A craftier Tereus, cousin, hast thou met,
Would serve your turns.
One fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,
Kills LAVINIA
Remaineth nought, but to inter our brethren,
Now will I to that old Andronicus,
And, from the place where you behold us now,
He craves a parley at your father's house,
Well could I leave our sport to sleep awhile.
Blood and revenge are hammering in my head.
It is to jet upon a prince's right?
Go fetch them hither to us presently.
In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny.
I will enchant the old Andronicus
For no name fits thy nature but thy own!
Then give me leave, for losers will have leave
And buried one and twenty valiant sons,
As who should say 'Old lad, I am thine own.'
This vengeance on me had they executed.
And from her bosom took the enemy's point,
Give Mutius burial with our brethren.
O, calm thee, gentle lord, although I know
Without controlment, justice, or revenge?
But hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground.
Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge:
See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.
Enter DEMETRIUS and CHIRON with LAVINIA, ravished, her hands cut off, and her tongue cut out
My heart suspects more than mine eye can see.
Exeunt
How these were they that made away his brother.
To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.
And see the ambush of our friends be strong,
Not I, 'twas Chiron and Demetrius:
Sorrow concealed, like an oven stopp'd,
Of that self-blood that first gave life to you,
Even by my god I swear to thee I will.
Until his very downfall in the sea:
And in the Capitol and senate's right,
Why, she was wash'd and cut and trimm'd, and 'twas
I have brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.
The crying babe controll'd with this discourse:
In bootless prayer have they been held up,
I will not re-salute the streets of Rome,
Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.
Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are:
But, out, alas! here have we found him dead.
Let's kiss and part, for we have much to do.
Now is my turn to speak. Behold this child:
Is it your trick to make me ope the door,
But yet let reason govern thy lament.
be won at last,
There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
Led us to Rome, strangers, and more than so,
She's with the lion deeply still in league,
Why, didst thou not come from heaven?
Willing you to demand your hostages,
Have lopp'd and hew'd and made thy body bare
A thousand fiends, a thousand hissing snakes,
And do not break into these deep extremes.
Come, Marcus, come, kinsmen, this is the way.
A nobler man, a braver warrior,
Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh,
You are deceived: for what I mean to do
If foul desire had not conducted you?
Farewell, proud Rome, till Lucius come again,
Upon the wasted building, suddenly
Revenge, ye heavens, for old Andronicus!
Come, let me see what task I have to do.
Without the help of any hand at all.
Barr'st me my way in Rome?
Let not this wasp outlive, us both to sting.
And in the fountain shall we gaze so long
A Roman now adopted happily,
Now, farewell, flattery: die, Andronicus,
O Tamora! was ever heard the like?
Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON bearing off the Nurse's body
That should have murdered Bassianus here.
Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome!
And I am sent to be revenged on him.
Exeunt LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS
Alarbus goes to rest, and we survive
My lord, there is a messenger from Rome
In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.
Come down, and welcome me to this world's light,
For two and twenty sons I never wept,
And see their blood, or die with this reproach.
Confederate with the queen and her two sons:
Tell him Revenge is come to join with him,
Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt
I train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole
A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.
A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam!
Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed!
You were as good to shoot against the wind.
And we will all subscribe to thy advice:
Enter MARCUS and LAVINIA
Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine.
Exit
And here, in sight of heaven, to Rome I swear,
The empress, the midwife, and yourself:
For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent
Can the son's eye behold his father bleed?
But yet so just that he will not revenge.
Thanks, gentle Romans: may I govern so,
Here, boy, to Pallas: here, to Mercury:
Upon her wit doth earthly honour wait,
This minion stood upon her chastity,
Doth burn the heart to cinders where it is.
Come on, my lords, the better foot before:
Then which way shall I find Revenge's cave?
I am his first-born son, that was the last
Which, like a taper in some monument,
That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.
Whose mouth is cover'd with rude-growing briers,
Seest thou this letter? take it up, I pray thee,
Traitors, avaunt! Where is the emperor's guard?
Along with me: I'll see what hole is here,
Come hither, boy, come, come, and learn of us
Romans, make way: the good Andronicus.
Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours,
In thy uprightness and integrity,
O, let me teach thee! for my father's sake,
Who doth molest my contemplation?
They ravish'd her, and cut away her tongue,
I will most willingly attend your ladyship.
And for these bitter tears, which now you see
Of my word, I have written to effect,
Exit
Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me than life!
Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee,
Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge
And never, whilst I live, deceive men so:
Villain, I have done thy mother.
Becomes not Titus' brother: get thee gone:
Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock:
Hides the gold
Come, let us go, and pray to all the gods
Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me,
To mount aloft with thy imperial mistress,
Who hath abandoned her holy groves
I care not, I, knew she and all the world:
The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms.
Under your patience, gentle empress,
Ran mad through sorrow: that made me to fear,
Thou great defender of this Capitol,
Now, what a thing it is to be an ass!
Thou dost not slumber: see, thy two sons' heads,
Who should I swear by? thou believest no god:
There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food,
For you, Prince Bassianus, I have pass'd
Here lacks but your mother for to say amen.
This do thou for my love, and so let him,
That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court,
Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?
For now he firmly takes me for Revenge,
For shame, put up.
Let us entreat, by honour of his name,
As for thee, boy, go get thee from my sight,
Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest,
To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge,
Takes the Child from the Nurse, and draws
Flattering myself, as if it were the Moor
For the offence he dies. This is our doom:
And may, for aught thou know'st, affected be.
To square for this? would it offend you, then
No, foolish tribune, no, no son of mine,
Secure of thunder's crack or lightning flash,
My heart's deep languor and my soul's sad tears:
And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy,
Whose souls are not corrupted as 'tis thought.
Dost overshine the gallant'st dames of Rome,
I'll to thy closet, and go read with thee
Trim sport for them that had the doing of it.
Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too.
Tell him it was a hand that warded him
Empress I am, but yonder sits the emperor.
And triumphs over chance in honour's bed.
Lavinia, live, outlive thy father's days,
We will solicit heaven and move the gods
Exeunt
Then should not we be tired with this ado.
Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy
No, Publius and Sempronius, you must do it,
And you have rung it lustily, my lord,
Brave slip, sprung from the great Andronicus,
And when I told the empress of this sport,
Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips:
Well mayst thou know her by thy own proportion,
And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,
Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom, sure.
I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point:
And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,
That you affect, and so must you resolve,
His napkin, with his true tears all bewet,
Imperious and impatient of your wrongs,
Why do the emperor's trumpets flourish thus?
This done, see that you take no longer days,
To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind,
Saturn is dominator over mine:
They shoot
Kills TITUS
Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths:
And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome.
Presents that I intend to send them both:
What says our general?
And, being intercepted in your sport,
That robb'd Andronicus of his good hand,
And strike her home by force, if not by words:
On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me.
Proud and ambitious tribune, canst thou tell?
What will whole months of tears thy father's eyes?
And wake the emperor and his lovely bride
Or, if not so, thy noble heart to break:
I am no baby, I, that with base prayers
That this fell fault of my accursed sons,
Or else I'll call my brother back again,
Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
That hath been breeder of these dire events.
The emperor, in his rage, will doom her death.
Even now I curse the day--and yet, I think,
I have no strength to pluck thee to the brink.
Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out,
Go, drag the villain hither by the hair,
How now, good fellow! wouldst thou speak with us?
And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,
'Tis true, 'tis true, witness my knife's sharp point.
Sith priest and holy water are so near
I give him you, the noblest that survives,
Sad stories chanced in the times of old.
Stabs BASSIANUS
Gramercy, lovely Lucius: what's the news?
Though Bassianus be the emperor's brother.
How now, dear sovereign, and our gracious mother!
Or any one of you, chop off your hand,
Which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee,
Which signify what hate they bear their emperor
Andronicus, I do not flatter thee,
These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.
If it be proved! you see it is apparent.
My lords, a solemn hunting is in hand,
Exit
And keep eternal spring-time on thy face,
Exit
The vigour and the picture of my youth:
Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him
Be it so, Titus, and gramercy too.
joints of every thing, but everything so out of joint
Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry,
I came to kill thee, cousin, and bear hence
Enter AJAX, armed, AGAMEMNON, ACHILLES, PATROCLUS, MENELAUS, ULYSSES, NESTOR, and others
They pass by strangely: they were used to bend
She's making her ready, she'll come straight: you
My half-supp'd sword, that frankly would have fed,
No matter.
The one and other Diomed embraces.
sinews, or else there be liars. Hector have a great
There is expectance here from both the sides,
Exit
Fie, savage, fie!
As heart can think or courage execute.
When I do tell thee, there my hopes lie drown'd,
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
How now, Trojan!
How now! what's the matter?
not have hit, I can watch you for telling how I took
But will you, then?
And linger not our sure destructions on!
Nay, I am sure she does. She came to him th' other
Or like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank,
Achilles is a fool to be commanded of Agamemnon,
Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw deep.
Why, then fly on, I'll hunt thee for thy hide.
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Art thou of blood and honour?
SCENE VI. Another part of the plains.
Exeunt
wit stirring and leave the faction of fools.
in the pie, for then the man's date's out.
Sir Valour dies, cries 'O, enough, Patroclus,
Exeunt
Oh! oh! groans out for ha! ha! ha!
Too subtle-potent, tuned too sharp in sweetness,
And did him service: he touch'd the ports desired,
Achilles! Achilles! Hector's slain! Achilles.
Think'st thou to catch my life so pleasantly
My lord,--
that loves quails, but he has not so much brain as
thousand watches.
Ay, what's the matter?
If I could have remembered a gilt counterfeit, thou
may tutor thee: thou scurvy-valiant ass! thou art
down the door? How now! what's the matter?
what: what have I brought you to do?
That we have better men. But, hit or miss,
discharging less than the tenth part of one. They
No, but he's out o' tune thus. What music will be in
You depend upon a noble gentleman, I must needs
Thy wife hath dream'd, thy mother hath had visions,
Hath any honour, but honour for those honours
swearing rascals, that stale old mouse-eaten dry
I have had my labour for my travail, ill-thought on of
Cry, Trojans, cry! a Helen and a woe:
And, like a dew-drop from the lion's mane,
digestion, why hast thou not served thyself in to
SCENE VIII. Another part of the plains.
What wouldst thou?
Prerogative of age, crowns, sceptres, laurels,
And may that soldier a mere recreant prove,
Good night.
You are such a woman! one knows not at what ward you
Now she sharpens: well said, whetstone!
Lay hold upon him, Priam, hold him fast:
To every ticklish reader! set them down
She was not, sure.
Yea, so familiar!
Go we to council. Let Achilles sleep:
HECTOR falls
As well wherein 'tis precious of itself
Bi-fold authority! where reason can revolt
But for these instances.
Farewell till then.
All Greek, and this all Troy, my mother's blood
To call upon him, he hopes it is no other
I do not like this fooling.
company! fair desires, in all fair measure,
You dog!
And with another knot, five-finger-tied,
So now, fair prince of Troy, I bid good night.
heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris.
whilst he railed at me. 'Sfoot, I'll learn to
Stand fast, and wear a castle on thy head!
But, thieves, unworthy of a thing so stol'n,
churlish as the bear, slow as the elephant: a man
I have with exact view perused thee, Hector,
our melancholy upon your head!
True, he was so: I know the cause too: he'll lay
But I'll endeavour deeds to match these words,
Observe degree, priority and place,
Here is such patchery, such juggling and such
O foolish Cressid! I might have still held off,
And then, forsooth, the faint defects of age
sailor breaks a biscuit.
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous,
Thou shouldest strike him.
Have to the port of Athens sent their ships,
O, courage, courage, princes! great Achilles
Or else a breath: the combatants being kin
word. I will rather leave to see Hector, than
Of this strange nature that a thing inseparate
He is so plaguy proud that the death-tokens of it
But 'gainst your privacy
attributes?
How now, how now!
Two traded pilots 'twixt the dangerous shores
Alas, poor chin! many a wart is richer.
Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart:
And when we have our armours buckled on,
Which for Antenor we deliver you:
bare till merit crown it: no perfection in reversion
You train me to offend you, get you in:
Not yet mature, yet matchless, firm of word,
Is he so much? Do you not think he thinks himself a
God-a-mercy, that thou wilt believe me, but a
Enter AGAMEMNON, ULYSSES, DIOMEDES, NESTOR, AJAX, MENELAUS, and CALCHAS
Come, you are deceived, I think of no such thing.
In mere oppugnancy: the bounded waters
Ay, and perhaps receive much honour by him.
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry:
And blind oblivion swallow'd cities up,
To stop his ears against admonishment?
How now, young man! mean'st thou to fight to-day?
Of such a winnow'd purity in love,
Exeunt TROILUS and AENEAS
As he being drest to some oration.'
Where, where? Art thou come? why, my cheese, my
Than in the note of judgment, and worthier
As seld I have the chance--I would desire
their faction: but it was a strong composure a fool
Exeunt
Agamemnon, how if he had boils? full, all over,
Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have,
Pour'st in the open ulcer of my heart
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen
shall be a mock for his truth, and what truth can
So, so, rub on, and kiss the mistress. How now!
To him, Patroclus, tell him I humbly desire the
Is she worth keeping? why, she is a pearl,
I'll send the fool to Ajax and desire him
If that the praised himself bring the praise forth:
Even she.
Should with a bond of air, strong as the axle-tree
I wonder now how yonder city stands
'Tis he, I ken the manner of his gait,
themselves. O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus,
Whose life were ill bestow'd or death unfamed
A juggling trick,--to be secretly open.
melancholy, if you will favour the man, but, by my
That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzy's thoughts.
Words, vows, gifts, tears, and love's full sacrifice,
The obligation of our blood forbids
Well, she looked yesternight fairer than ever I saw
Exit
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
Ha! ha! Alas, poor wretch! ah, poor capocchia!
Walk into her house,
As Hector's leisure and your bounties shall
And Hector laughed.
What say you to't?
To give me now a little benefit,
The elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy:
Outliving beauty's outward, with a mind
As many farewells as be stars in heaven,
Spent more in her defence. But, worthy Hector,
Disguise the holy strength of their command,
Comes fast upon. Good my brother Troilus,
Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters! his
her? Come, draw this curtain, and let's see your
Prince Troilus, I have loved you night and day
Who were those went by?
I will knead him, I'll make him supple.
Leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
A strange fellow here
whore, a good quarrel to draw emulous factions
Not Neoptolemus so mirable,
'Tis done like Hector, but securely done,
Up to the eastern tower,
A paltry, insolent fellow!
Friend, we understand not one another: I am too
are able and yet reserve an ability that they never
This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
Cries 'Excellent! 'tis Agamemnon just.
SCENE I. A part of the Grecian camp.
in her body. No, Hector is not a better man than Troilus.
Love! ay, that it shall, i' faith.
Her bed is India, there she lies, a pearl:
Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late,
I will go meet them: and, my Lord AEneas,
And at that time bequeathe you my diseases.
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
Exeunt, fighting
We come to speak with him. Ulysses, enter you.
'Tis no matter! I shall speak as much as thou
Within my soul there doth conduce a fight
The herd hath more annoyance by the breeze
A tucket
We come to speak with him, and you shall not sin,
Thou must.
Like witless antics, one another meet,
Command, I mean, friend.
Patroclus, I'll speak with nobody.
The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor
Enter DIOMEDES
I do not speak of flight, of fear, of death,
Ay: the heavens hear me!
We sympathize: Jove, let AEneas live,
That no man is the lord of any thing,
The Greeks are strong and skilful to their strength,
Be gone, I say: the gods have heard me swear.
We left them all at home: but we are soldiers,
Ha! known!
And I will give a taste of it forthwith
That I assure you:
Aside
hurt home to-day? he's not hurt: why, this will do
I must not believe you:
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear
To doubtful fortunes, sequestering from me all
Ulysses,
I'll lay my life, with my disposer Cressida.
Prithee, tarry:
Brother, she is not worth what she doth cost
You have the honey still, but these the gall,
bull! now, dog! 'Loo, Paris, 'loo! now my double-
That go or tarry.
Or that we women had men's privilege
That matter needless, of importless burden,
Might be affronted with the match and weight
shall be humble. Few words to fair faith: Troilus
Disgrace to your great worths and shame to me,
Exeunt AENEAS and Trojans
What sneaking fellow comes yonder?
The devil take thee, coward!
Behold, I pray you!
How much in having, or without or in,
I part you. The falcon as the tercel, for all the
may run mad, but, if with too much brain and too
As that which causeth it: how can I moderate it?
with such waterflies, diminutives of nature!
That I may give the local wound a name
For this time will I take my leave, my lord.
and bleed to death upon. Now, the dry serpigo on
Sir, I propose not merely to myself
O, all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge!
Hector's a gallant man.
Will you walk in, my lord?
a-work, and how ill requited! why should our
He chid Andromache and struck his armourer,
Will you set your wit to a fool's?
Instance, O instance! strong as heaven itself,
Hector, in view of Trojans and of Greeks,
But dare all imminence that gods and men
There is no tarrying here, the hart Achilles
You are too bitter to your countrywoman.
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits:
True swains in love shall in the world to come
I will be patient, outwardly I will.
were as good crack a fusty nut with no kernel.
Thou, trumpet, there's my purse.
Hark, how Troy roars! how Hecuba cries out!
You have no judgment, niece: Helen
As if those organs had deceptious functions,
Marry, at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus' chin.
Re-enter CASSANDRA, with PRIAM
Doth lesser blench at sufferance than I do.
So be it, either to the uttermost,
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood
Away! away!
And find the welcome of a noble foe.
Fear not my truth: the moral of my wit
God b' wi' you, with all my heart.
Let's have your company, or, if you please,
It is familiar,--but at the author's drift,
It is no matter, now I have't again.
Were I the general, thou shouldst have my office
It were no match, your nail against his horn.
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we?
I speak no more than truth.
That she beloved knows nought that knows not this:
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare.
After the general, I beseech you next
dissembling luxurious drab, of a sleeveless errand.
spirits and fires!
In taint of our best man. No, make a lottery,
Men prize the thing ungain'd more than it is:
To throw down Hector than Polyxena:
Even this.
vain-glory. He knows not me: I said 'Good morrow,
Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy:
But hear you, hear you!
of the south, the guts-griping, ruptures, catarrhs,
He knew his man.
Lie there for pavement to the abject rear,
Staying for waftage. O, be thou my Charon,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.
To our pavilion shall I lead you, sir.
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
Feel, then.
O, you shall be exposed, my lord, to dangers
Let Paris bleed, 'tis but a scar to scorn,
I give to both your speeches, which were such
to think on't. What says she there?
More ready to cry out 'Who knows what follows?'
Courtiers as free, as debonair, unarm'd,
To make the service greater than the god
Which hath our several honours all engaged
general run then? were not that a botchy core?
To tender objects, but he in heat of action
With surety stronger than Achilles' arm
Yet god Achilles still cries 'Excellent!
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye
constant being won: they are burs, I can tell you,
as bad a kind, Achilles: and now is the cur Ajax
Ay, do, do, thou sodden-witted lord! thou hast no
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason
To-morrow will I wear it on my helm,
No more than what he thinks he is.
By all Diana's waiting-women yond,
fear the worst oft cures the worse.
Here, sister, arm'd, and bloody in intent.
Exeunt severally PRIAM and HECTOR. Alarums
Nor suffer others.
An act that very chance doth throw upon him--
The present eye praises the present object.
desert before his birth, and, being born, his addition
Enter PANDARUS
immaterial skein of sleave-silk, thou green sarcenet
If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword,
And when I have the bloody Hector found,
As fast as they are made, forgot as soon
conjure and raise devils, but I'll see some issue of
And cried 'Inestimable!'--why do you now
Amidst the other, whose medicinable eye
Yet, dread Priam,
Besides the applause and approbation To which,
To have her back return'd: thus to persist
'Tis Nestor right. Now play him me, Patroclus,
My lord, will you be true?
There is between my will and all offences
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst
As perfectly is ours as yours, my lord,
Who shall tell Priam so, or Hecuba?
That sore to ride before him to the field.
If to-morrow be a fair day, by eleven o'clock it will
O, here he comes.
For time is like a fashionable host
That this great soldier may his welcome know.
Are ceremonious courtiers.
painted cloths.
Here, there, and every where, he leaves and takes,
about him to-day, I can tell them that: and there's
Commotion in the winds! frights, changes, horrors,
As, if it can, I will presume in you--
In Hector's wrath.
To Calchas' house, and there to render him,
Such to-be-pitied and o'er-wrested seeming
I'll answer to my lust: and know you, lord,
Condition, I had gone barefoot to India.
disposer is sick.
and so there is, but it lies as coldly in him as fire
is prodigious, there will come some change, the sun
Friend, you! pray you, a word: do not you follow
Pardon me, pardon me.
Beggar the estimation which you prized
In faith, I will, la, never trust me else.
Than breath or pen can give expressure to:
between, but small thanks for my labour.
But he already is too insolent,
A Grecian's life hath sunk, for every scruple
Ah, sir, there's many a Greek and Trojan dead,
Lay negligent and loose regard upon him:
you must be watched ere you be made tame, must you?
Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking uncle!
What nearer debt in all humanity
Falling in, after falling out, may make them three.
The amity that wisdom knits not, folly may easily
Enter PANDARUS and CRESSIDA
Insisture, course, proportion, season, form,
Queen Hecuba and Helen.
Bids thee, with most divine integrity,
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts,--
safe-conduct for his person of the magnanimous
Each Trojan that is master of his heart,
Why thou damnable box of envy, thou, what meanest
Enter a Servant and PANDARUS
Enter AENEAS
And buckle in a waist most fathomless
[Beating him]  You whoreson cur!
To stubborn critics, apt, without a theme,
against May.
Pray you, speak no more to me: I will leave all as I
shall be such to Cressid as what envy can say worst
My Lord Pandarus, honey-sweet lord,--
A proof of strength she could not publish more,
All's done, my lord.
Wholly, sir.
How have we spent this morning!
With the first glance that ever--pardon me--
The youngest son of Priam, a true knight,
Asses, fools, dolts! chaff and bran, chaff and bran!
For 'tis a cause that hath no mean dependance
By friendship nor by speaking.'
I'll hide my silver beard in a gold beaver
To bring me thither?
fair on Friday as Helen is on Sunday. But what care
For both our honour and our shame in this
Troilus, farewell! one eye yet looks on thee
The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well,
Never go home, here starve we out the night.
I cannot, lord, I have important business,
stay the cooling too, or you may chance to burn your lips.
And thou shalt hunt a lion, that will fly
Exeunt
Why, brother Hector,
Enter DIOMEDES, TROILUS following
And never suffers matter of the world
that her eyes ran o'er.
To their benumbed wills, resist the same,
wouldst not have slipped out of my contemplation: but
drab, and uses the traitor Calchas' tent: I'll
Pursue each other, or shall be divided
Constringed in mass by the almighty sun,
Grace! not so, friend: honour and lordship are my titles.
That wails her absence?
To set his sense on the attentive bent,
Enter THERSITES
O,'tis fair play.
Why sigh'st thou without breaking?
Pard to the hind, or stepdame to her son,'
I see my reputation is at stake
Exit
Enter his thoughts, save such as do revolve
I do but partly know, sir: it is music in parts.
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Stand fair, I pray thee: let me look on thee.
My love admits no qualifying dross,
For what he has he gives, what thinks he shows,
and most illustrious six-or-seven-times-honoured
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
How now! what's the matter? who was here?
We saw him at the opening of his tent:
Patroclus will give me any thing for the
flap for a sore eye, thou tassel of a prodigal's
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.
the blow, unless it swell past hiding, and then it's
To close the day up, Hector's life is done.
By Jove,
His pettish lunes, his ebbs, his flows, as if
As true thou tell'st me, when I say I love her,
We do not throw in unrespective sieve,
[Within]  What, 's all the doors open here?
And I myself see not the bottom of it.
Why, beg, then.
there's laying on, take't off who will, as they say:
Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or
she's noted.
SCENE I. Troy. A street.
I pray thee, stay.
Re-enter DIOMEDES
I with great truth catch mere simplicity,
Engaging and redeeming of himself
As when his virtues shining upon others
At Priam's royal table do I sit,
plague break thy neck for frightening me! What's
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him.'
Where I may wallow in the lily-beds
Whose price hath launch'd above a thousand ships,
O, be persuaded! do not count it holy
A retreat sounded
not care, but to be Menelaus, I would conspire
Exeunt, marching
As 'twere from us all, a man distill'd
Now, my sweet guardian! Hark, a word with you.
And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents.
Now play me Nestor, hem, and stroke thy beard,
Exit
Is this in way of truth, yet ne'ertheless,
A pestilence on him! now will he be mocking:
Thersites!
He must fight singly to-morrow with Hector, and is so
Come your ways, come your ways, an you draw backward,
You shall not go: one cannot speak a word,
Oh! oh! a while, but ha! ha! ha!
I do desire it.
marry, thus, my lord: my dear lord and most esteemed
Nay, I'll watch you for that, and that's one of the
After we part from Agamemnon's tent,
You men will never tarry.
I see them not with my old eyes: what are they?
Who in this dull and long-continued truce
Than Cressid borne from Troy.
Are there such? such are not we: praise us as we
The Trojan trumpets sound the like, my lord.
Exeunt
I was advertised their great general slept,
This is the monstruosity in love, lady, that the will
And, stickler-like, the armies separates.
You are such another!
to-day, whereupon the Grecians begin to proclaim
But that's no welcome: understand more clear,
The thing I shall repent. See, see, your silence,
He is a privileged man. Proceed, Thersites.
Is, as a virtue, fix'd, to-day was moved:
prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling that he
Exeunt ACHILLES, HECTOR, AJAX, and NESTOR
But sorrow, that is couch'd in seeming gladness,
Roaring for Troilus, who hath done to-day
Knows almost every grain of Plutus' gold,
That find such cruel battle here within?
Pandarus,--
Of will and judgment: how may I avoid,
Nay, good Ajax.
For, by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
As stuff for these two to make paradoxes.
the deed in the praise.
Now, princes, for the service I have done you,
Well, well.
I will go eat with thee and see your knights.
Peace, Trojan, lay thy finger on thy lips!
Enter ACHILLES
Weigh you the worth and honour of a king
The shaft confounds,
Thy better must.
sweet queen.
would it were otherwise, that I could beat him,
That's Antenor: he has a shrewd wit, I can tell you,
You brace of warlike brothers, welcome hither.
Come, come, Thersites, help to trim my tent:
As green as Ajax' and your brain so temper'd,
And with ridiculous and awkward action,
Even in the faith of valour, to appear
Who's that?
Why will he not upon our fair request
O, like a book of sport thou'lt read me o'er,
In praising her: I tell thee, lord of Greece,
Which you do here forbid me, royal Priam.
As you must needs, for you all cried 'Go, go,'--
Enter TROILUS
'Tis the old Nestor.
What error leads must err, O, then conclude
Most sure she was.
And thou most reverend for thy stretch'd-out life
gentleman! A plague upon Antenor!
and how he goes! O admirable youth! he ne'er saw
In whom the tempers and the minds of all
Mock not, that I affect the untraded oath,
owl, a puttock, or a herring without a roe, I would
Come in with me, Thersites.
Have you seen my cousin?
What hath she done, prince, that can soil our mothers?
She's bitter to her country: hear me, Paris:
To hurt by being just: it is as lawful,
her eyes: did her eyes run o'er too?
loves the whore there, might send that Greekish
The providence that's in a watchful state
That bastes his arrogance with his own seam
Had I a sister were a grace, or a daughter a goddess,
A labour saved!
I am not warm yet, let us fight again.
The bonds of heaven are slipp'd, dissolved, and loosed,
Enter TROILUS
What, art thou devout? wast thou in prayer?
Thersites!
But, in the wind and tempest of her frown,
I take to-day a wife, and my election
Exceeds man's might, that dwells with gods above.
To curb those raging appetites that are
and a stand: ruminates like an hostess that hath no
SCENE V. Another part of the plains.
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
and such like, the spice and salt that season a man?
This Trojan scorns us, or the men of Troy
Retorts to chiding fortune.
though they be long ere they are wooed, they are
I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Trojan:
taken such pains to bring you together, let all
Achilles, Ajax, who wears his wit in his belly and
Well, and how?
Power into will, will into appetite,
nothing, for we may live to have need of such a
The effect doth operate another way.
How now, thou core of envy!
But what the repining enemy commends,
Ilium? good niece, do, sweet niece Cressida.
And every Greek of mettle, let him know,
Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves
Nor his beauty.
What are you reading?
There they stand yet, and modestly I think,
Ay, with celerity, find Hector's purpose
Ay, sir, when he goes before me.
[Within]  Nay, good my lord,--
The man's undone forever, for if Hector break not his
Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns
I'll kill thee every where, yea, o'er and o'er.
Hard to seem won: but I was won, my lord,
And he shall buy my daughter, and her presence
My Lord Ulysses, tell me, I beseech you,
Along the field I will the Trojan trail.
than I will a serpent when he hisses: he will spend
Enter TROILUS
If we have lost so many tenths of ours,
My very soul of counsel! stop my mouth.
Exit with CRESSIDA
Even to my full of view.
To what infectiously itself affects,
He shall not need it, if he have his own.
With wanton Paris sleeps, and that's the quarrel.
When that the general is not like the hive
As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
Exit
The Trojans' trumpet.
And, like as there were husbandry in war,
If beauty have a soul, this is not she,
You shake, my lord, at something: will you go?
I am giddy, expectation whirls me round.
And they'll seem glorious.
are tasted, allow us as we prove, our head shall go
Away, Patroclus!
There, where we see the lights.
But there was such laughing! Queen Hecuba laughed
They are at hand and ready to effect it.
Withal bring word if Hector will to-morrow
The time right deadly, I beseech you, go.
speak truest not truer than Troilus.
afterwards.
shall pride carry it?
chiefest of them too: if I cannot ward what I would
Beginning in the middle, starting thence away
Dost thou entreat me, Hector?
Thou great commander, nerve and bone of Greece,
A lord of Trojan blood, nephew to Hector,
And after-dinner's breath.
it is no matter, thyself upon thyself! The common
What moves Ajax thus to bay at him?
you have sworn to me. What, are you gone again?
'Deliver Helen, and all damage else--
Exeunt AGAMEMNON and MENELAUS
But an unkind self, that itself will leave,
'Twere better she were kiss'd in general.
'Yea,' let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,
out, and give it him.' But there was such laughing!
fellow! Go thy way, Hector! There's a brave man,
sleeve of Troy there in his helm: I would fain see
catch, if he knock out either of your brains: a'
Princes,
Thou stool for a witch!
In this wild action, for the success,
To come as humbly as they used to creep
Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes,
Of things to come at large. It is supposed
Have ears more deaf than adders to the voice
Less valiant than the virgin in the night
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
No more words, Thersites, peace!
Were I alone to pass the difficulties
But when contention and occasion meet,
Speak not so loud.
a copper nose.
When thou hast hung thy advanced sword i' the air,
How can that be?
He, like a puling cuckold, would drink up
endeavour be so loved and the performance so loathed?
With such a hell of pain and world of charge,
Empale him with your weapons round about,
'Because thou canst not ease thy smart
O Jupiter! there's no comparison.
To reinforcement, or we perish all.
You bid them rise, and live.
You speak your fair pleasure, sweet queen. Fair
My love with words and errors still she feeds,
The fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy relics
Instance, O instance! strong as Pluto's gates,
heating of the oven and the baking, nay, you must
birth, beauty, good shape, discourse, manhood,
Fair Lady Cressid,
Now to deliver her possession up
Every tithe soul, 'mongst many thousand dismes,
three and twenty. Go thy way, Troilus, go thy way!
Please you walk in, my lords.
With spans and inches so diminutive
What's your affair I pray you?
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
Nay, but regard him well.
I am unarm'd, forego this vantage, Greek.
'twill be his bane, he cannot bear it.
He shall not carry him: I'll be ta'en too,
Ay, and good next day too.
Ay, or surly borne,--
You are amazed, my liege, at her exclaim:
what's Achilles?
Ay, my lord.
O, meaning you. I will go learn more of it.
What exploit's in hand? where sups he to-night?
And, look, how many Grecian tents do stand
Farewell, sweet queen.
That has he knows not what. Nature, what things there are
Fair be to you, my lord, and to all this fair
That I shall lose distinction in my joys,
He hears naught privately that comes from Troy.
AJAX and HECTOR enter the lists
Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady.
That's Hector, that, that, look you, that, there's a
They're loving, well composed with gifts of nature,
Faith, sir, superficially.
must be witty now. She does so blush, and fetches
Why keep we her? the Grecians keep our aunt:
Of author's pen or actor's voice, but suited
but my Nell would not have it so. How chance my
hath not a glimpse of, nor any man an attaint but he
Know them from eyes of other mortals?
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts
O Cupid, Cupid, Cupid!
else holds fashion: a burning devil take them!
The purpose is perspicuous even as substance,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Enter HECTOR
He rises on the toe: that spirit of his
And by the way possess thee what she is.
What, shall I come? the hour?
cutting the web. After this, the vengeance on the
Nay, stay, by Jove, I will not speak a word:
Do I curse thee?
If I be false, or swerve a hair from truth,
And your great love to me restrains you thus:
Makes all these bodements.
This lord go to him! Jupiter forbid,
Bounds in my father's,' by Jove multipotent,
She was beloved, she loved, she is, and doth:
That breath fame blows, that praise, sole sure,
better man than I am?
Good day, good day.
Good morrow, cousin Cressid: what do you talk of?
May worthy Troilus be half attach'd
any more to your tents: I will keep where there is
There's language in her eye, her cheek, her lip,
'In witness whereof the parties interchangeably'--
But value dwells not in particular will,
And in my vantbrace put this wither'd brawn,
Desired my Cressid in right great exchange,
Boldness comes to me now, and brings me heart.
That my integrity and truth to you
If it be so, yet bragless let it be,
And wake him to the answer, think you?
'Twould not become him, his own's better.
But Pandarus,--O gods, how do you plague me!
little blood they do, I'll be a curer of madmen.
Prizes of accident as oft as merit:
An her hair were not somewhat darker than Helen's--
Whose height commands as subject all the vale,
Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom:
Why, this is kindly done.
Hark! Hector's trumpet.
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
In characters as red as Mars his heart
I'll interrupt his reading.
Till he communicate his parts to others:
That one by one pursue: if you give way,
Make livers pale and lustihood deject.
And corresponsive and fulfilling bolts,
What raging of the sea! shaking of earth!
Thersites, my lord.
To the bottom of the worst. Let Helen go:
Before a sleeping giant.' Tell him so.
Or strange, or self-affected!
false to him: do not you know of him, but yet go
The surgeon's box, or the patient's wound.
Exit
pitiful goers-between be called to the world's end
But to the sport abroad: are you bound thither?
Swords! any thing, he cares not, an the devil come
He that takes that doth take my heart withal.
Sir, you of Troy, call you yourself AEneas?
Else might the world convince of levity
Enter AENEAS
Now, Ajax, hold thine own!
Why then, we did our main opinion crush
Yea, overshines ourself.
My will enkindled by mine eyes and ears,
[Within]  Who calls?
The knife that made it.
The worthiness of praise distains his worth,
I pray you, stay, by hell and all hell's torments
knower, and Patroclus is a fool.
And, like a strutting player, whose conceit
Come, he is here, my lord, do not deny him:
If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off,
porridge after meat! I could live and die i' the
Of this my privacy
The past proportion of his infinite?
I'll fetch you one.
For honour travels in a strait so narrow,
I reck not though I end my life to-day.
'Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain.'
I'll nothing do on charge: to her own worth
Although particular, shall give a scantling
My major vow lies here, this I'll obey.
defend my wiles, upon my secrecy, to defend mine
Which better fits a lion than a man.
When we have soil'd them, nor the remainder viands
We dare not move the question of our place,
me smile, make Hector angry?
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted:
From certain and possess'd conveniences,
A great addition earned in thy death.
For beauty, wit,
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar,
A maiden battle, then? O, I perceive you.
They are at it, hark! Proud Diomed, believe,
Why am I a fool?
As if he were forgot, and, princes all,
O, a brave man!
him.
I? I care not an she were a black-a-moor, 'tis all one to me.
It doth import him much to speak with me.
This shall be told our lovers, Lord AEneas,
Think, we had mothers, do not give advantage
So, so, we draw together.
Now I begin to relish thy advice,
particulars therein to a total.
Now expectation, tickling skittish spirits,
Thou mayst tell that knowest.
The wife I chose? there can be no evasion
out says thou art a fair corse, I'll be sworn and
Do not, dear father.
Come, kiss, and let us part.
Madam, your uncle Pandarus.
Amen. Where's Achilles?
And so, good night.
You are in the state of grace.
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.
Who's there? my Lord AEneas! By my troth,
Awake thee!
TROILUS passes
It hath to climb. The general's disdain'd
purse, thou? Ah, how the poor world is pestered
Yes, lion-sick, sick of proud heart: you may call it
As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.
What was his cause of anger?
would not, as they term it, praise her: but I would
Do deeds worth praise and tell you them at night.
Well, go to, go to.
And you as well to keep her, that defend her,
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude:
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends:
ACT V
Nor nothing monstrous neither?
desire is boundless and the act a slave to limit.
if she be fair, 'tis the better for her, an she be
Beat loud the tabourines, let the trumpets blow,
Peace, fool! I have not done.
To fight for and maintain!
Is it possible?
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells,
Good arms, strong joints, true swords, and,
To show itself but pride, for supple knees
SCENE III. The Grecian camp. Before Achilles' tent.
They're come from field: let us to Priam's hall,
Who must we answer?
Would the fountain of your mind were clear again,
Enter ACHILLES and PATROCLUS
head, you would eat chickens i' the shell.
short-armed ignorance itself knows is so abundant
Now heavens forbid such scarcity of youth!
is't not? Why, this is brave now. Who said he came
Concur together, severally entreat him.
And with his arms outstretch'd, as he would fly,
On his fair worth and single chivalry.
Good morrow, lord, good morrow.
Presuming on their changeful potency.
It is your uncle.
Nay, but you part in anger.
Amen.
What vice is that, good Troilus? chide me for it.
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars
If ever she leave Troilus! Time, force, and death,
Two curs shall tame each other: pride alone
Prithee, get thee in: would thou hadst ne'er been
Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile:
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
They are polluted offerings, more abhorr'd
This she? no, this is Diomed's Cressida:
His blows are well disposed: there, Ajax!
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost
The unity and married calm of states
Than spotted livers in the sacrifice.
But the protractive trials of great Jove
You are so empty of them. Should not our father
Where one but goes abreast: keep then the path,
cheese, Nestor, and that same dog-fox, Ulysses, is
From my great purpose in to-morrow's battle.
Our imputation shall be oddly poised
That's my mind too. Good morrow, Lord AEneas.
Do, do.
To what may be digested in a play.
Hector is slain.
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel
Fears make devils of cherubims, they never see truly.
Makes me afeard.
Was fairer than his grandam and as chaste
All time of pause, rudely beguiles our lips
With sounding Troilus. I will not go from Troy.
Both taxing me and gaging me to keep
Our general doth salute you with a kiss.
Bull-bearing Milo his addition yield
On the fair Cressid.
To be a speaker free, when I am hence
All fears attending on so dire a project.
Thy spacious and dilated parts: here's Nestor,
Achilles shall have word of this intent,
As feel in his own fall, for men, like butterflies,
an addle egg.
A thought of added honour torn from Hector.
I know no touch of consanguinity,
The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses,
That are without him, as place, riches, favour,
And once fought with him: he was a soldier good,
struck him down, the disdain and shame whereof hath
If so, I have derision medicinable,
Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek
'Bring action hither, this cannot go to war:
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,
You, like a lecher, out of whorish loins
undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of
What treason were it to the ransack'd queen,
What was his answer?
Ay, Greek, and that shall be divulged well
And in such indexes, although small pricks
And to procure safe-conduct from Agamemnon.
Re-enter PATROCLUS
croak like a raven, I would bode, I would bode.
More laud than gilt o'er-dusted.
Of their observant toil the enemies' weight,--
Enter PARIS, TROILUS, AENEAS, DEIPHOBUS, ANTENOR, and DIOMEDES
Which, like a bourn, a pale, a shore, confines
Say I she is not fair?
O Cressid! O false Cressid! false, false, false!
Dexterity so obeying appetite
than himself
Not you, my brother, with your true sword drawn,
[To AGAMEMNON]  My lord, you feed too much on this dislike.
Friend, know me better, I am the Lord Pandarus.
May pierce the head of the great combatant
What is your name?
That sleeve is mine that he'll bear on his helm,
Ah, sweet ducks!
Is't possible? no sooner got but lost? The devil
Good night.
Of nature be corrupted through affection,
Or like a star disorb'd? Nay, if we talk of reason,
And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive,
This is the most despiteful gentle greeting,
Should have hare-hearts, would they but fat
And flies fled under shade, why, then the thing of courage
were not Thersites, for I care not to be the louse
O, you, my lord? by Mars his gauntlet, thanks!
He pageants us. Sometime, great Agamemnon,
The worthiest of them tell me name by name,
man, let it sleep? a bugbear take him!
Himself! no, he's not himself: would a' were
And then to speak.
Ay, good now, love, love, nothing but love.
Bid them have patience, she shall come anon.
HELENUS passes
he should take his choice. O admirable man! Paris?
Incurr'd a traitor's name, exposed myself,
get his sinews to make catlings on.
The reasons you allege do more conduce
I do believe it, for they pass'd by me
By Priam and the general state of Troy:
That's to 't indeed, sir: marry, sir, at the request
Now good or bad, 'tis but the chance of war.
In resolution to keep Helen still,
And formless ruin of oblivion,
Farewell: yet, soft! Hector! take my leave:
I'll tell her the next time I see her: for my part,
or end: well, Troilus, well: I would my heart were
For depravation, to square the general sex
Is this Achilles?
Having his ear full of his airy fame,
Enter TROILUS
And add more coals to Cancer when he burns
Fall Greeks, fail fame, honour or go or stay,
palsies, raw eyes, dirt-rotten livers, wheezing
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance:
In fellest manner execute your aims.
dog, a mule, a cat, a fitchew, a toad, a lizard, an
ACT IV
I know that, fool.
My brother Troilus lodges there to-night:
Speak, prince of Ithaca, and be't of less expect
As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain,
With the whole quality wherefore: I fear
He is my prize, I will not look upon.
Than what not stirs. The cry went once on thee,
capable creature.
They are opposed already.
Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee,
'As false as Cressid.'
I do not care whether you do or no. She's a fool to
Why then for Venus' sake, give me a kiss,
The strong-ribb'd bark through liquid mountains cut,
And great Troy shrieking.
And skilless as unpractised infancy.
Rest, sword, thou hast thy fill of blood and death.
Hector, by this, is arming him in Troy,
I am ashamed. O heavens! what have I done?
But I attest the gods, your full consent
This man, lady, hath robbed many beasts of their
Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles,
May one, that is a herald and a prince,
Dear lord, go you and greet him in his tent:
Thou bitch-wolf's son, canst thou not hear?
They laughed not so much at the hair as at his pretty answer.
We know each other well.
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's king,
Hector, thou sleep'st,
'Great Hector's sister did Achilles win,
Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis past: and yet it is not,
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
Hath been as dear as Helen, I mean, of ours:
Not making any scruple of her soilure,
The noble Menelaus.
I speak not 'be thou true,' as fearing thee,
Enter THERSITES, solus
How now, how now! how go maidenheads? Here, you
Deliver'd to us, and for him forthwith,
As it is known she is, these moral laws
him above, his complexion is higher than his, he
In love, i' faith, to the very tip of the nose.
Wit would be out of fashion.
Cold lips blow to their deities, take thee from me.
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
Let him be told so, lest perchance he think
in valour, in every thing illegitimate. One bear will
It is.
Who, Thersites?
To be another's fool. I would be gone:
What trumpet? look, Menelaus.
For the love of all the gods,
A goodly medicine for my aching bones! O world!
He is not Hector.
Come, Hector, come, go back:
AEneas, call my brother Troilus to me,
With the rude brevity and discharge of one.
there be hacks!
If any come, Hector shall honour him,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace,
The enemy flying.
I'll give you something else.
Stand where the torch may not discover us.
[To TROILUS]  My well-famed lord of Troy, no
In like conditions as our argument,
With every joint a wound, and that to-morrow!
Pause, if thou wilt.
The beauty that is borne here in the face
man if you see him?
Exit DIOMEDES
Shall Ajax fight with Hector?
O Priam, yield not to him!
Good night: I prithee, come.
Fair leave and large security. How may
Without the rack.
Music within
O traitors and bawds, how earnestly are you set
what verse for it? what instance for it? Let me see:
He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a
She is as far high-soaring o'er thy praises
Remember! yes.
No.
No, nor Hector is not Troilus in some degrees.
If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle
For I'll not kill thee there, nor there, nor there,
You shall see.
The ravish'd Helen, Menelaus' queen,
An 'twould, you'ld carry half.
Alarums: excursions. Enter THERSITES
rather be such a man as Troilus than Agamemnon and
Admits no orifex for a point as subtle
How so?
March patiently along: let one be sent
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
To answer for his love, tell him from me
Enter AJAX
him, niece: look you how his sword is bloodied, and
Ay, ay, prithee now. By my troth, sweet lord, thou
Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself
No more, I say.
Of what I feel: I am all patience.
Wert thou an oracle to tell me so,
Ah, poor our sex! this fault in us I find,
Doth valour's show and valour's worth divide
Both alike:
himself! Well, the gods are above, time must friend
I'd not believe thee. Henceforth guard thee well,
intelligence of this whore: the parrot will not
Which way would Hector have it?
the scratching of thee, I would make thee the
He hath a lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
there, his brother, the bull,--the primitive statue,
No Achilles with him.
And there they fly or die, like scaled sculls
there's one up.
ANTENOR passes
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness.
And I do stand engaged to many Greeks,
as Helen: an she were not kin to me, she would be as
We must with all our main of power stand fast:
High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service,
Thy commander, Achilles. Then tell me, Patroclus,
Knocking within
Patroclus ta'en or slain, and Palamedes
They say he yesterday coped Hector in the battle and
His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends.
I was about to tell thee:--when my heart,
No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother.
Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think.
With that which here his passion doth express?
and whatever praises itself but in the deed, devours
[Aside to NESTOR]  And how his silence drinks up
Then will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost his argument.
Fierce to their skill and to their fierceness valiant,
Tell her I have chastised the amorous Trojan,
He will be the physician that should be the patient.
I know, is such a wrest in their affairs
There's Ulysses and old Nestor, whose wit was mouldy
'Tis Troilus' fault: come, come, to field with him.
Health to you, valiant sir,
O'er-run and trampled on: then what they do in present,
where he answers again,
Even with the vail and darking of the sun,
SCENE I. Troy. Priam's palace.
As they contend with thee in courtesy.
Why stay we, then?
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
But how should this man, that makes
You know a sword employ'd is perilous,
Patience herself, what goddess e'er she be,
When Helen is a maid again, and his.
the subject! and war and lechery confound all!
Mercury, lose all the serpentine craft of thy
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons,
The issue is embracement: Ajax, farewell.
scarce, it will not in circumvention deliver a fly
Ay, there, there.
And that which looks like pride is courtesy.
fairer. He that is proud eats up himself: pride is
'Faith, to say truth, brown and not brown.
As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love
thou learn a prayer without book. Thou canst strike,
So he is.
That's AEneas: is not that a brave man? he's one of
But, by great Mars, the captain of us all,
And fly with me to Cressid!
There is a law in each well-order'd nation
That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself,
And would, as I shall pity, I could help!
canst thou? a red murrain o' thy jade's tricks!
Does thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles.
He loved me--O false wench!--Give't me again.
valiant Ajax to invite the most valorous Hector
Exeunt all but ULYSSES and NESTOR
sped to-day. You'll remember your brother's excuse?
And yet, good faith, I wish'd myself a man,
should he do here?
I spy.
Have with you, prince. My courteous lord, adieu.
Shall find him by his large and portly size.
Achievements, plots, orders, preventions,
Whose was it?
Their warlike fraughtage: now on Dardan plains
For that will physic the great Myrmidon
no. And, my lord, he desires you, that if the king
In what place of the field doth Calchas keep?
Yet, after all comparisons of truth,
If none of them have soul in such a kind,
Because your speech hath none that tells him so?
Speaking in deeds and deedless in his tongue,
I prithee, Diomed, visit me no more.
Why was my Cressid then so hard to win?
The holding.
Writes me: 'That man, how dearly ever parted,
By whom, AEneas?
Yet hold I off. Women are angels, wooing:
Who, I? why, he'll answer nobody, he professes not
To an ass, were nothing, he is both ass and ox: to
SCENE IV. The same. Pandarus' house.
Shall make it good, or do his best to do it,
For, I presume, brave Hector would not lose
Jove's accord,
Cressid, I love thee in so strain'd a purity,
What offends you, lady?
On one and other side, Trojan and Greek,
Why tell you me of moderation?
Nay, but do, then,
The unknown Ajax.
But to prove to you that Helen loves him: she came
That's done, as near as the extremest ends
[Within]  My lord, is the lady ready?
Derive this, come.
In all designs begun on earth below
Trouble him not,
What music is this?
She's well, but bade me not commend her to you.
But be as Ajax.
Shall quite strike off all service I have done,
Peace, you ungracious clamours! peace, rude sounds!
and all brokers-between Pandars! say, amen.
Ajax is grown self-will'd, and bears his head
O the gods! what's the matter?
Ha, art thou there?
he see me, you shall see him nod at me.
Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar's fall,
Would I could meet that rogue Diomed! I would
Follow me, sirs, and my proceedings eye:
ever since kept Hector fasting and waking.
My Lord Pandarus,--
The cygnet's down is harsh and spirit of sense
Enter ACHILLES
He hangs the lip at something: you know all, Lord Pandarus.
Thersites! what's the matter, man?
No, not a whit.
On, Myrmidons, and cry you all amain,
Look ye yonder, niece, is't not a gallant man too,
I shall have such a life!
Where? yonder? that's Deiphobus. 'Tis Troilus!
But he as he, the heavier for a whore.
Shall more obey than to the edge of steel
And daughters of the game.
Sore hurt and bruised: the dreadful Sagittary
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece,
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye?
That gave't surmised shape. Why then, you princes,
Nay, that shall not serve your turn, that shall not,
And yet the spacious breadth of this division
And to make a sweet lady sad is a sour offence.
And to his hand when I deliver her,
And those boils did run? say so: did not the
less to you.
To the hearers, sir.
And is it true that I must go from Troy?
Exeunt
Enter DIOMEDES, with CRESSIDA
Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my cousin,
My niece is horribly in love with a thing you have,
Exit
And haste her to the purpose.
Exit
To talk with him and to behold his visage,
These lovers cry Oh! oh! they die!
Enter CRESSIDA
We two, that with so many thousand sighs
Things small as nothing, for request's sake only,
have his wit this year.
Good words, Thersites.
stay behind her father, let her to the Greeks, and so
Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is?
again such preposterous discoveries!
thoughts beget hot deeds, and hot deeds is love.
Within
Peace, fool!
Nor play at subtle games, fair virtues all,
When comes Troilus? I'll show you Troilus anon: if
Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter.
hast not slept to-night? would he not, a naughty
Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice,
Should hold up high in brass, and such again
Without a heart to dare or sword to draw
That we have stol'n what we do fear to keep!
So let it now, for it has been while going by.
And very courtly counsel: I'll begin.
Nay, look upon him.
You shall command me, sir.
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man
That same Diomed's a false-hearted rogue, a most
You have broke it, cousin: and, by my life, you
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it,
Re-enter ULYSSES
Who should withhold me?
three pound, lift as much as his brother Hector.
As bending angels, that's their fame in peace:
Behold thy fill.
sprite: I'll fetch her. It is the prettiest
His humorous predominance, yea, watch
Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions.
O, farewell, dear Hector!
what's thyself?
Wherein my sword had not impressure made
My prophecy is but half his journey yet,
So please you, save the thanks this prince expects:
You flow to great distraction, come, my lord.
As amply titled as Achilles is,
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
But by degree, stand in authentic place?
The knight opposed.
Exeunt TROILUS and CRESSIDA
How now, Thersites! what lost in the labyrinth of
Most disobedient and refractory.
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.
Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector,
But yet be true.
Things won are done, joy's soul lies in the doing.
This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood:
As you must needs, for you all clapp'd your hands
Half stints their strife before their strokes begin.
Will one day end it.
Finds bottom in the uncomprehensive deeps,
Can he not be sociable?
Were he not proud, we all should share with him:
not: he there: that he: look you there.
Both merits poised, each weighs nor less nor more,
you any eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is not
That hast so long walk'd hand in hand with time:
And, hark, what discord follows! each thing meets
His figure and his heat.  I was much wrapt in this,
For, O, love's bow
'As true as Troilus' shall crown up the verse,
When we have here her base and pillar by us.
Is this the Lady Cressid?
A mock is due. Will you walk on, my lord?
That doth invert the attest of eyes and ears,
Have not more gift in taciturnity.
What?
Why, he is very young: and yet will he, within
And make distinct the very breach whereout
And suddenly, where injury of chance
In storms of fortune, for in her ray and brightness
Should he 'scape Hector fair: if he were foil'd,
Must kiss their own feet.
You are for dreams and slumbers, brother priest,
With this cramm'd reason: reason and respect
SCENE II. The same. Court of Pandarus' house.
What a pair of spectacles is here!
And, by device, let blockish Ajax draw
And whither go they?
Go call Thersites hither, sweet Patroclus:
sing, certainly.
Helen's heart good now, ha! Would I could see
I bade the vile owl go learn me the tenor of the
But that's no argument for kissing now,
Yea, with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity,
Not palating the taste of her dishonour,
Quoth she, 'Here's but two and fifty hairs on your
O, let my lady apprehend no fear: in all Cupid's
With an imperial voice--many are infect.
Go, bear Patroclus' body to Achilles,
Toadstool, learn me the proclamation.
Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
Holds honour far more precious-dear than life.
[Within]  Cry, Trojans, cry!
But yet you look not well upon him, for whosoever you
Exeunt TROILUS, AENEAS, and ULYSSES
In his descent than shall my prompted sword
Enter PRIAM, HECTOR, TROILUS, PARIS, and HELENUS
He doth rely on none,
Exit
'Well, well!' why, have you any discretion? have
their thoughts
what's the matter?
ducks i' the river: go to, go to.
Forces pass
I prithee now, to bed.
Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely.
That holds his honour higher than his ease,
Why sigh you so profoundly? where's my lord? gone!
raves in saying nothing.
And under-honest, in self-assumption greater
How now, Prince Troilus! wherefore not afield?
'Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice
And he's as tetchy to be woo'd to woo.
And with an accent tuned in selfsame key
To greet the warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woo you
But makes it much more heavy. Hector's opinion
O Pandarus! I tell thee, Pandarus,--
And, in the publication, make no strain,
Most wisely hath Ulysses here discover'd
No, sir, he stays for you to conduct him thither.
Arming to answer in a night alarm.'
Enter TROILUS and CRESSIDA
Great Hector was a man as good as he.
A valiant Greek, AEneas,--take his hand,--
There's for you, Patroclus.
a kiss in fee-farm! build there, carpenter, the air
O, no, you shall not go.
Nor faint in the pursuit.
Achilles bids me say, he is much sorry,
There is a word will Priam turn to stone,
If you'll confess he brought home noble prize--
That in their country did them that disgrace,
footing than blind reason stumbling without fear: to
Like Perseus' horse: where's then the saucy boat
The fever whereof all our power is sick.
But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
And appetite, an universal wolf,
With wings more momentary-swift than thought.
Sir, mine own company.
bites his lip with a politic regard, as who should
Thanks and good night to the Greeks' general.
Please it our general to pass strangely by him,
worth the nineth part of a sparrow. This lord,
Look, Hector, how the sun begins to set,
I come from the worthy Achilles,--
Wanting his manage, and they will almost
Why, my negation hath no taste of madness.
Beckoning with fiery truncheon my retire,
Hark! you are call'd: some say the Genius so
With all my force, pursuit and policy.
O, pardon, I offend.
Their brave pavilions: Priam's six-gated city,
arithmetic but her brain to set down her reckoning:
He is thy crutch, now if thou lose thy stay,
A stirring dwarf we do allowance give
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it,
In kissing, do you render or receive?
But his evasion, wing'd thus swift with scorn,
Then Troilus should have too much: if she praised
Troilus now! You shall see Troilus anon.
When Helen is defended, nor none so noble
for a placket. I have said my prayers and devil Envy
And cull their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.
Peace, drums!
The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows:
'Lo, Jupiter is yonder, dealing life!'
The sinew and the forehand of our host,
You fur your gloves with reason. Here are
gallantry of Troy: I  would fain have armed to-day,
Alarum. Hector and Ajax fight
Our noble general, do not do so.
Sir, I do depend upon the lord.
But we in silence hold this virtue well,
As may be in the world, lady.
SCENE II. Troy. A room in Priam's palace.
leave you one o' these days: and I have a rheum
Not I.
When that the watery palate tastes indeed
loads o' gravel i' the back, lethargies, cold
not, but, I am sure, none, unless the fiddler Apollo
On terms of base compulsion! Can it be
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view
Whose weak untimber'd sides but even now
are they not monsters?
There is no lady of more softer bowels,
I'll have my kiss, sir. Lady, by your leave.
But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
too.
They tax our policy, and call it cowardice,
I fear it much, and I do fear besides,
Thy knower, Patroclus: then tell me, Patroclus,
I say, this Ajax--
Bounding between the two moist elements,
My dreams will, sure, prove ominous to the day.
Enter PANDARUS and Troilus's Boy, meeting
What news, AEneas, from the field to-day?
Exit
more tractable.
By Jove, I'll play the hunter for thy life
What says my sweet queen? My cousin will fall out
Spur them to ruthful work, rein them from ruth.
This night in banqueting must all be spent.
Good night, my lord.
Exit
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
Anticipating time with starting courage.
He's not yet through warm: force him with praises:
Dear, trouble not yourself: the morn is cold.
Nothing at all, unless that this were she.
ACT II
Who's there?
O, tell, tell.
To wrathful terms: this place is dangerous,
The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches
That so degenerate a strain as this
Exit
Exeunt
world! world! thus is the poor agent despised!
Good word nor look: what, are my deeds forgot?
When fame shall in our islands sound her trump,
All dues be render'd to their owners: now,
Know you the musicians?
in mine eyes too, and such an ache in my bones
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim,
Thou shouldst not bear from me a Greekish member
Ajax employ'd plucks down Achilles' plumes.
The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns
Do not chafe thee, cousin:
They call him Ajax.
do these men play?
Cassandra doth foresee, and I myself
I am Achilles.
'Tis certain, greatness, once fall'n out with fortune,
I will not, uncle: I have forgot my father,
I do not strain at the position,--
whore-masterly villain, with the sleeve, back to the
Hark, Greek: as much as I do Cressid love,
I am as true as truth's simplicity
Nay, good my lord, go off:
And give me swift transportance to those fields
Ajax,' and he replies 'Thanks, Agamemnon.' What think
He that meets Hector issues from our choice
As roused with rage with rage doth sympathize,
Strain'd purely from all hollow bias-drawing,
Let me be privileged by my place and message,
'Tis Agamemnon's wish, and great Achilles
In rank Achilles must or now be cropp'd,
Does he not?
What plagues and what portents! what mutiny!
'Twixt his stretch'd footing and the scaffoldage,--
Till then I'll sweat and seek about for eases,
And to the field goes he, where every flower
Nay, I must hold you.
My lord, I do beseech you, pardon me,
Yet he loves himself: is't not strange?
There was never a truer rhyme. Let us cast away
Whose was't?
Full of protest, of oath and big compare,
And hale him hither.
Despising many forfeits and subduements,
As Hector pleases.
You shall not bob us out of our melody: if you do,
To find persistive constancy in men:
Your answer, sir.
You see him there, do you?
There is no help,
And let your mind be coupled with your words.
I would my arms could match thee in contention,
Exit
Enter AENEAS, PARIS, ANTENOR, DEIPHOBUS, and DIOMEDES
honesty, my mask, to defend my beauty, and you, to
And this neglection of degree it is
we'll put you i' the fills. Why do you not speak to
you'll give him me. Be true to my lord: if he
Seals a commission to a blank of danger,
I'll take what winter from your lips, fair lady:
Therefore Achilles: but, whate'er, know this:
My sword should bite it: not the dreadful spout
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
Have I not tarried?
Upon a lazy bed the livelong day
Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back,
They call this bed-work, mappery, closet-war,
I have, thou gallant Trojan, seen thee oft
One noble man that hath one spark of fire,
Heigh-ho!
This is not she. O madness of discourse,
If you do say we think him over-proud
Labouring for destiny make cruel way
The plague of Greece upon thee, thou mongrel
Troilus! thou coward Troilus!
Lady, a word: I'll bring you to your father.
When Hector's grandsire suck'd: he is old now,
[Aside to TROILUS]  Follow his torch, he goes to
In doing wrong extenuates not wrong,
instrument. Now, sweet queen.
Make that demand of the prover. It suffices me thou
The cuckold and the cuckold-maker are at it. Now,
As honour, loss of time, travail, expense,
Exit
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,
Look, how thy wounds do bleed at many vents!
PROLOGUE
A plague of opinion! a man may wear it on both
To others' eyes, nor doth the eye itself,
Put pardon, father Nestor, were your days
bereave you o' the deeds too, if she call your
What, does the cuckold scorn me?
I know not: 'tis put to lottery, otherwise
I did swear patience.
The splinter of a lance. Even so much.
the bolting.
Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
sworn upon't she never shrouded any but lazars.
Who shall I command, sir?
I would swim after.
When fitness calls them on, and know by measure
I'll give you boot, I'll give you three for one.
Ah, ah!
armed and gone ere ye came to Ilium? Helen was not
'Tis just to each of them, he is himself.
Troy, yet upon his basis, had been down,
Will with a trumpet 'twixt our tents and Troy
O, be not moved, Prince Troilus:
Enter ACHILLES and Myrmidons
and oblique memorial of cuckolds, a thrifty
Exeunt
What art thou, Greek? art thou for Hector's match?
We shall be much unwelcome.
Welcome, Sir Diomed! here is the lady
Now do I see thee, ha! have at thee, Hector!
I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors:
Enter CASSANDRA, raving
ere your grandsires had nails on their toes, yoke you
Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba,
Troilus, by Menelaus.
There Diomed doth feast with him to-night,
Which with my scimitar I'll cool to-morrow.
SCENE III. The Grecian camp. Before Agamemnon's tent.
Enter MARGARELON
In hot digestion of this cormorant war--
HECTOR passes
ACT I
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach:
Sweet, above thought I love thee.
And ruminate himself, shall he be worshipp'd
must needs confess,--
He'll tickle it for his concupy.
To feed for aye her ramp and flames of love,
Thou must be gone, wench, thou must be gone, thou
All the commerce that you have had with Troy
Ha, ha!
To the hot passion of distemper'd blood
shoeing-horn in a chain, hanging at his brother's
And still it might, and yet it may again,
Say one of your watches.
Where?
Achilles! a drayman, a porter, a very camel.
The seas and winds, old wranglers, took a truce
What, with me too, Thersites?
O traitor Diomed! turn thy false face, thou traitor,
Thou dost not speak so much.
Did move your greatness and this noble state
Exeunt
Let me go to him.
Upon the pashed corses of the kings
O heavens! you love me not.
No, but brown.
As if that luck, in very spite of cunning,
transcends.
Nay, then,--
prove it so.
Lies mocking our designs: with him Patroclus
Than to make up a free determination
What Propugnation is in one man's valour,
To-morrow do I meet thee, fell as death,
Paris, you speak
know not what pride is.
Fare you well, with all my heart.
Exeunt ACHILLES and PATROCLUS
Trumpet within
Ha!
Can qualify the same?
What honey is expected? Degree being vizarded,
Why have I blabb'd? who shall be true to us,
Who, in your thoughts, merits fair Helen best,
To see us here unarm'd: I have a woman's longing,
Crams his rich thievery up, he knows not how:
But edifies another with her deeds.
With one of Priam's daughters.
Keeps thicket. Please it our great general
Indeed, a tapster's arithmetic may soon bring his
Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate:
What mean these fellows? Know they not Achilles?
That Hector, by the fifth hour of the sun,
a brown favour--for so 'tis, I must confess,--
Come, thou shalt bear a letter to him straight.
To call together all his state of war,
Ay, that.
That, through the sight I bear in things to love,
To tell you, fair beholders, that our play
This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head.
I'll not meddle nor make no further. He that will
Yesterday took: Troy holds him very dear.
Come, stretch thy chest and let thy eyes spout blood,
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath,
Wherefore should you so?
Of divination in our sister work
Nothing, but our undertakings, when we vow to weep
To make a recordation to my soul
art. Look you, who comes here?
I have, as when the sun doth light a storm,
For which we lose our heads to gild his horns.
Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
Exeunt
Than wife is to the husband? If this law
To him that victory commands? or do you purpose
Your answer, sir.
Exit
I'll seek them.
Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safer
The prince must think me tardy and remiss,
My lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
Exit
The passage and whole carriage of this action
If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,
Then enterprise is sick! How could communities,
To-morrow morning call some knight to arms
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees.
I'll frush it and unlock the rivets all,
Trumpet, blow loud,
O, then, beware,
That any drop thou borrow'dst from thy mother,
The kiss you take is better than you give,
From Troy and Troilus.
Walk here i' the orchard, I'll bring her straight.
Have at thee!
And the great Hector's sword had lack'd a master,
leg,--to what form but that he is, should wit larded
A gory emulation 'twixt us twain:
'Twas not my purpose, thus to beg a kiss:
O, sir,--
hair is my father, and all the rest are his sons.'
'hereafter' the kneading, the making of the cake, the
Paris your brother, and Deiphobus,
The error of our eye directs our mind:
Is he so young a man and so old a lifter?
What should they grant? what makes this pretty
Farewell, my lord: I as your lover speak,
There is a mystery--with whom relation
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves
If he were proud,--
has not past three or four hairs on his chin,--
The glory of our Troy doth this day lie
against destiny. Ask me not, what I would be, if I
Exit
This quarrel would excite? Yet, I protest,
Is he here, say you? 'tis more than I know, I'll
Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing,
No trumpet answers.
For I will throw my glove to Death himself,
Give us a prince of blood, a son of Priam,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause,
Doth that grieve thee?
As many as be here of pander's hall,
[Within]  She comes to you.
somebody had heard her talk yesterday, as I did. I
of a lazar, so I were not Menelaus! Hey-day!
How do you? how do you?
Forestall prescience, and esteem no act
Why should I war without the walls of Troy,
No, this thrice worthy and right valiant lord
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
Do you hear, my lord? do you hear?
pour in, pour in, his ambition is dry.
And farewell goes out sighing. O, let not
Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphne's love,
Take heed, the quarrel's most ominous to us: if the
Pleased with this dainty bait, thus goes to bed.
Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
becomes him better than any man in all Phrygia.
Is 'plain and true,' there's all the reach of it.
Enter AGAMEMNON, AJAX, MENELAUS, NESTOR, DIOMEDES, and others, marching. Shouts within
Whilst emulation in the army crept:
A Trojan hath been slain: since she could speak,
Corrects the ill aspects of planets evil,
And quoted joint by joint.
In good troth, it begins so.
Foh, foh! adieu, you palter.
Is the prince there in person?
So, traitor! 'When she comes!' When is she thence?
Not portable, lie under this report:
Because we now are full. It was thought meet
Which his own will shall have desire to drink:
If you have stomach, the general state, I fear,
Upon the love you bear me, get you in.
What he requests of us. Good Diomed,
We are too well acquainted with these answers:
Then, sweet my lord, I'll call mine uncle down,
The Grecians' cause.
But 'be thou true,' say I, to fashion in
Salutes each other with each other's form,
Did haunt you in the field.
In faith, I do not: come hither once again.
How now! where's thy master? at my cousin
Will he give you the nod?
you a song now.
May I, sweet lady, beg a kiss of you?
But, now you have it, take it.
Nor once deject the courage of our minds,
The dun and factious nobles of the Greeks
What art thou?
[Within]  Brother Troilus!
Calchas, I think. Where's your daughter?
That you are odd, and he is even with you.
Guardian!--why, Greek!
Proposed for the deserver! O gentle Pandarus,
evasions have ears thus long. I have bobbed his
She is a theme of honour and renown,
Good boy, tell him I come.
To the expecters of our Trojan part,
invisible soul,--
Haste there before us: I constantly do think--
lungs, bladders full of imposthume, sciaticas,
And then you would have tarried. Hark!
Prithee, be silent, boy, I profit not by thy talk:
With such a careless force and forceless care
Love, love, nothing but love, still more!
Enter, from one side, AENEAS, and Servant with a  torch, from the other, PARIS, DEIPHOBUS, ANTENOR, DIOMEDES, and others, with torches
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more
So do each lord, and either greet him not,
Quite from their fixure! O, when degree is shaked,
And stands alone.
To bed, to bed: sleep kill those pretty eyes,
your reasons:
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
And make a sop of all this solid globe:
Enter AJAX
And fame in time to come canonize us,
Welcome to Troy! now, by Anchises' life,
SCENE III. The same. Street before Pandarus' house.
To his experienced tongue, yet let it please both,
Cries 'come' to him that instantly must die.
With his face backward. In humane gentleness,
The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth,
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
This shall I undertake, and 'tis a burden
I would not from thee.
What grief hath set the jaundice on your cheeks?
Yet is the kindness but particular,
Yet go we under our opinion still
If in his death the gods have us befriended,
Lechery, lechery, still, wars and lechery, nothing
Let it be call'd the wild and wandering flood,
Be moderate, be moderate.
Night hath been too brief.
To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures
Enter PARIS and HELEN, attended
Give pardon to my speech:
I have a kind of self resides with you,
his own glass, his own trumpet, his own chronicle,
Do a fair message to his kingly ears?
'Jupiter!' quoth she, 'which of these hairs is Paris,
Nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk,
plague upon Antenor! I would they had broke 's neck!
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your
If there be one among the fair'st of Greece
Is a' not? it does a man's heart good. Look you
neck i' the combat, he'll break 't himself in
He offers in another's enterprise,
Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home.
Sweet, rouse yourself, and the weak wanton Cupid
So much for Nestor.
Fly not, for shouldst thou take the river Styx,
What, am I poor of late?
And I'll spring up in his tears, an 'twere a nettle
Sith every action that hath gone before,
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
In such a rein, in full as proud a place
A bastard son of Priam's.
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive
This is her question.
And Antenorides, with massy staples
You have not patience, come.
What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector
Or, shedding, breed a nursery of like evil,
hast a fine forehead.
We may not think the justness of each act
Good brother, come you hither,
Why, this hath not a finger's dignity:
Force should be right, or rather, right and wrong,
Nor, princes, is it matter new to us
All the better, their fraction is more our wish than
Of her contaminated carrion weight,
I will have this: whose was it?
Achilles stands i' the entrance of his tent:
sweet sewer.
is love a generation of vipers? Sweet lord, who's
The tide whereof is now. Good night, great Hector.
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
To NESTOR
What, is he angry too?
Be answer'd in his challenge: Ajax is ready.
Not going from itself, but eye to eye opposed
miracle: yet, in a sort, lechery eats itself.
Here comes himself to guide you.
enough than for us to undergo any difficulty imposed.
You spy! what do you spy? Come, give me an
That if he overhold his price so much,
Exit
Hark, what good sport is out of town to-day!
What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud.
ACT III
Hold, patience!
To give thee nightly visitation.
change, would give an eye to boot.
So he says here.
I'll decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands
all Greece.
Come, come, I'll hear no more of this, I'll sing
I bring a trumpet to awake his ear,
Let it not be believed for womanhood!
I would not for half Troy have you seen here.
If he do, the rich shall have more.
Tell me, sweet uncle, what's the matter?
Let it be known to him that we are here.
beats me, and I rail at him: O, worthy satisfaction!
That noseless, handless, hack'd and chipp'd, come to him,
To invite the Trojan lords after the combat
Virgins and boys, mid-age and wrinkled eld,
This 'tis:
So he has.
Sir, my lord would instantly speak with you.
fetch him hither, go.
prince of chivalry!
The bitter disposition of the time
like draught-oxen and make you plough up the wars.
No question.
And bring AEneas and the Grecian with you.
Exit PANDARUS. An alarum
I would correct him.
You know now your hostages, your uncle's word and my
Hark! a retire upon our Grecian part.
To stand the push and enmity of those
She hath not given so many good words breath
grown a very land-fish, language-less, a monster.
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword,
The heavens themselves, the planets and this centre
Exeunt severally
With these your white enchanting fingers touch'd,
An a' be proud with me, I'll pheeze his pride:
I shall, and bring his answer presently.
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.
with a piece of your performance. Nell, he is full
And call them shames? which are indeed nought else
Cobloaf!
To take that course by your consent and voice,
And you, Achilles, let these threats alone,
it harder for our mistress to devise imposition
Accept distracted thanks.
O, sir, to such as boasting show their scars
Trumpet within
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
A prologue arm'd, but not in confidence
As truth's authentic author to be cited,
I must not break my faith.
I am yours,
courtly and thou art too cunning. At whose request
SCENE VII. Another part of the plains.
Excuse me.
praise him.
Oft have you--often have you thanks therefore--
From false to false, among false maids in love,
My heart beats thicker than a feverous pulse,
To keep her constancy in plight and youth,
Exeunt
He acts thy greatness in: and when he speaks,
Juno have mercy! how came it cloven?
Severals and generals of grace exact,
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks:
For womanish it is to be from thence.
I say, the proclamation!
Ajax hath ta'en AEneas: shall it be?
That there's no maculation in thy heart:
Re-enter PANDARUS
O Cressida! but that the busy day,
And what hath mass or matter, by itself
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks:
Of any true decision. Nature craves
Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar
that he is a gouty Briareus, many hands and no use,
He brought a Grecian queen, whose youth and freshness
borrows of the moon, when Diomed keeps his
Amen. Whereupon I will show you a chamber with a
indistinguishable cur, no.
Do not, porpentine, do not: my fingers itch.
Fronting the sun, receives and renders back
not brown neither,--
How now, my charge!
Who comes here?
By all the everlasting gods, I'll go!
And turn'd crown'd kings to merchants.
A little proudly, and great deal misprizing
SCENE V. The Grecian camp. Lists set out.
Not I, honey-sweet queen. I long to hear how they
You know me, do you not?
not to dog him: they say he keeps a Trojan
Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue:
Exeunt all except TROILUS and ULYSSES
Exeunt TROILUS and DIOMEDES, fighting
To Tenedos they come,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his tent
'Tis but early days.
Tell me, you heavens, in which part of his body
It should be challenged.
Till accident or purpose bring you to't:
Bid me do any thing but that, sweet Greek.
At mine, sir, and theirs that love music.
Midway between your tents and walls of Troy,
Why such unplausive eyes are bent on him:
the mortal Venus, the heart-blood of beauty, love's
blood, and hot blood begets hot thoughts, and hot
An all men were o' my mind,--
Want similes, truth tired with iteration,
Here's a letter come from yond poor girl.
And think, perchance, they'll sell, if not,
What is the remedy?
Fair Lord AEneas, let me touch your hand,
Like one besotted on your sweet delights:
Do to this body what extremes you can,
I would thou didst itch from head to foot and I had
By the same token, you are a bawd.
Heart of our numbers, soul and only spirit.
Exeunt
But, by the forge that stithied Mars his helm,
I'll fight with him alone: stand, Diomed.
Turn, slave, and fight.
Fie, fie, my brother!
Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilion stand,
maid! where's my cousin Cressid?
Those scraps are good deeds past, which are devour'd
Yea, Troilus? O, well fought, my youngest brother!
I will see you hanged, like clotpoles, ere I come
A whoreson dog, that shall pelter thus with us!
Here! what should he do here?
here but to thrash Trojans, and thou art bought and
Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt
If not Achilles? Though't be a sportful combat,
So great as our dread father in a scale
What a vice were it in Ajax now,--
Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do,
Unarm, sweet Hector.
and puts me her white hand to his cloven chin--
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
She shall have it, my lord, if it be not my lord Paris.
How some men creep in skittish fortune's hall,
[Aside to DIOMEDES]  O, this is well, he rubs the
Our firebrand brother, Paris, burns us all.
Bold as an oracle, and sets Thersites,
Amen.
To shame the zeal of my petition to thee
Than all the island kings,--disarm great Hector.
Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, Antenor, and all the
I was sent for to the king, but why, I know not.
That by a pace goes backward, with a purpose
So mainly as my merit: I cannot sing,
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.
Come, come, enter my tent.
Alas, a kind of godly jealousy--
I come to lose my arm, or win my sleeve.
Mistress Thersites!
they'll stick where they are thrown.
How earnestly they knock! Pray you, come in:
Cressida's?
As the sweet Troilus. O you gods divine!
Is it so concluded?
But tickles still the sore.
take him to be, he is Ajax.
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason
We fear to warrant in our native place!
Out, gall!
As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast
virtue seek
Good morrow, uncle Pandarus.
Cry 'No recovery.'
Strike, fellows, strike, this is the man I seek.
methinks, is the curse dependent on those that war
new-ta'en sparrow.
If you'll avouch 'twas wisdom Paris went--
Exeunt
Or give me ribs of steel! I shall split all
O, contain yourself
To help unarm our Hector: his stubborn buckles,
O Agamemnon, let it not be so!
Where it may see itself. This is not strange at all.
Well, uncle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.
earwax: and the goodly transformation of Jupiter
Exit
Stand, stand, thou Greek, thou art a goodly mark:
There is among the Greeks Achilles, a better man than Troilus.
Instructed by the antiquary times,
That we come short of our suppose so far
And Cassandra laughed.
And, with a palsy-fumbling on his gorget,
Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his tent,--
Exit Boy
Cry, cry! Troy burns, or else let Helen go.
I will not keep my word.
Ajax renown'd. O heavens, what some men do,
Give him allowance for the better man,
Like or find fault, do as your pleasures are:
verse: we see it, we see it. How now, lambs?
into whom nature hath so crowded humours that his
Call Agamemnon head and general.
Or rather, call my thought a certain knowledge--
If I go to him, with my armed fist I'll pash him o'er the face.
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
Thou blow'st for Hector.
PARIS passes
A hateful truth.
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here
Before the belching whale, then is he yonder,
To overbulk us all.
has got that same scurvy doting foolish young knave's
A' would have ten shares.
As fears and reasons? fie, for godly shame!
As far as toucheth my particular,
Then would come some matter from him, I see none now.
That the bless'd gods, as angry with my fancy,
This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl
particular additions, he is as valiant as the lion,
Were it not glory that we more affected
Appals our numbers: haste we, Diomed,
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart,
We must give up to Diomedes' hand
If not Achilles, nothing.
Untent his person and share the air with us?
Look, how thou diest! look, how thy eye turns pale!
AENEAS passes
Better at home, if 'would I might' were 'may.'
Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done,
You fillip me o' the head.
but when he performs, astronomers foretell it, it
An oath that I have sworn. I will not break it:
Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
Therefore 'tis meet Achilles meet not Hector.
You know me dutiful, therefore, dear sir,
Pleads your fair usage, and to Diomed
A retreat sounded
Upbraid my falsehood! when they've said 'as false
He.
Or else you love not, for to be wise and love
Yea, what he shall receive of us in duty
Let me embrace too. 'O heart,' as the goodly saying is,
But if there be not in our Grecian host
whole camp! or rather, the bone-ache! for that,
And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove,
We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes
thy fury! Shall the elephant Ajax carry it thus? He
Nay, I have done already.
my table so many meals? Come, what's Agamemnon?
What noise? what shriek is this?
see most bravely: I'll tell you them all by their
unjust knave, I will no more trust him when he leers
Why should a man be proud? How doth pride grow? I
What, are you up here, ho? speak.
Now, great Thetis' son!
my spiteful execrations. Then there's Achilles, a
SCENE II. The Same. A street.
bowels, thou!
Let me bear another to his horse, for that's the more
Hum!
not, she has the mends in her own hands.
Where thou wilt hit me dead?
A priest there offering to it his own heart.
I'll bring her to the Grecian presently:
Or may I never--
Re-enter CRESSIDA
To the first giver.'
Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.
And tell me, noble Diomed, faith, tell me true,
Good morrow, all.
Which, slanderer, he imitation calls,
prouder than the cur Achilles, and will not arm
Then marvel not, thou great and complete man,
Degrees in schools and brotherhoods in cities,
Cunning in dumbness, from my weakness draws
Enter HECTOR
Your leave, sweet Cressid!
Of cruel war: sixty and nine, that wore
direction till thy death! then if she that lays thee
I love you now, but not, till now, so much
Enter THERSITES
Commend me to your niece.
A retreat sounded
In Ilion, on your Greekish embassy.
Why, how now, Ajax! wherefore do you thus? How now,
Of nature and of nations speak aloud
Helenus? no. Yes, he'll fight indifferent well. I
Enter MENELAUS and PARIS, fighting: then THERSITES
Sodden business! there's a stewed phrase indeed!
To say the truth, true and not true.
Enter one in sumptuous armour
a man born in April.
Finch-egg!
As she is stubborn-chaste against all suit.
Hath Doreus prisoner,
You bring me to do, and then you flout me too.
Exit
Exeunt
born! I knew thou wouldst be his death. O, poor
In all swift haste.
So, Ilion, fall thou next! now, Troy, sink down!
When they go from Achilles: shall the proud lord
You're an odd man, give even or give none.
Soft! here comes sleeve, and t'other.
Let Ajax go to him.
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed,
Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting:
For every false drop in her bawdy veins
A token from her daughter, my fair love,
Here, Diomed, keep this sleeve.
Exit boy
No.
What did you swear you would bestow on me?
That knows his valour, and knows not his fear,
Which, I beseech you, call a virtuous sin--
E'en so, a great deal of your wit, too, lies in your
For speculation turns not to itself,
curse of mankind, folly and ignorance, be thine in
What is't?
Yes, good sooth: to, Achilles! to, Ajax! to!
Therefore no kiss.
The noblest hateful love, that e'er I heard of.
Even to his inches, and with private soul
SCENE I. The Grecian camp. Before Achilles' tent.
Should rob my bed-mate of my company.
Amen.
Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
It is too starved a subject for my sword.
Enter HECTOR
Rouse him and give him note of our approach.
A moiety of that mass of moan to come.
Who, I? alas, it is my vice, my fault:
I do not fly, but advantageous care
Hence, broker-lackey! ignomy and shame
But it straight starts you.
after. Nothing but lechery! all incontinent varlets!
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love,
I prithee, do not hold me to mine oath,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all
Lady, give me your hand, and, as we walk,
ere he has me.
That Paris is returned home and hurt.
You have bereft me of all words, lady.
Hector is dead, there is no more to say.
The unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask.
Who, my cousin Cressida?
Yea, like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish,
And sometimes we are devils to ourselves,
Our doubtful hope, our convoy and our bark.
So do all men, unless they are drunk, sick, or have no legs.
[Within]  Cry, Trojans!
What things again most dear in the esteem
My sequent protestation, be thou true,
Let me go and try:
Re-enter PANDARUS with CRESSIDA
Nor his qualities.
Hector's great spirit flew: answer me, heavens!
The lord be praised!
As iron to adamant, as earth to the centre,
Pointing on him.
Now the pledge, now, now, now!
Let him that will a screech-owl aye be call'd,
I'll make my match to live,
Yes, 'tis most meet: whom may you else oppose,
And give as soft attachment to thy senses
There lurks a still and dumb-discoursive devil
You will catch cold, and curse me.
A stranger to those most imperial looks
Be those with swords?
O, this is trim!
Sweet Pandarus,--
He is elder.
go one way or other: howsoever, he shall pay for me
What says my sweet queen, my very very sweet queen?
will you vouchsafe me a word?
Than the performance of our heaving spleens,
For here the Trojans taste our dear'st repute
How rank soever rounded in with danger.
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Well, welcome, welcome! I have seen the time.
Why, thou full dish of fool, from Troy.
But thou anon shalt hear of me again,
et cetera. Do this.
nine sparrows for a penny, and his pia mater is not
his guts in his head, I'll tell you what I say of
become of the wenching rogues? I think they have
Calchas' tent:
See, ho! who is that there?
SCENE IX. Another part of the plains.
Prophet may you be!
How were I then uplifted! but, alas!
Outswell the colic of puff'd Aquilon:
What, not between Troilus and Hector? Do you know a
With truant vows to her own lips he loves,
found it, and there an end.
He shent our messengers, and we lay by
From heart of very heart, great Hector, welcome.
That do contrive how many hands shall strike,
I will not meet with you to-morrow night:
And all cry, Hector! Hector's dead! O Hector!
Here's Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough and one
No, I'll be sworn.
Or those that with the fineness of their souls
To feast with me and see me at my tent.
Agamemnon!
Trumpets cease
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge
head, 'tis pride: but why, why? let him show us the
are gone: crows and daws, crows and daws! I had
That all with one consent praise new-born gawds,
[Beating him]  You cur!
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
To their subsequent volumes, there is seen
Trumpet sounds
sold among those of any wit, like a barbarian slave.
Before the sun rose he was harness'd light,
her wind so short, as if she were frayed with a
Bade him win all.
My matter is so rash: there is at hand
The raven chides blackness.
Till it hath travell'd and is mirror'd there
Exit CASSANDRA
Agamemnon is a fool, Achilles is a fool, Thersites
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
To AGAMEMNON
You have a Trojan prisoner, call'd Antenor,
rivelled fee-simple of the tetter, take and take
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.
At whose pleasure, friend
And give to dust that is a little gilt
say 'There were wit in this head, an 'twould out,'
I shall say so to him.
her and ill-thought on of you, gone between and
Injurious time now with a robber's haste
And so, good night.
What's his excuse?
Enter TROILUS armed, and PANDARUS
Is as the very centre of the earth,
How one man eats into another's pride,
heed of Troilus, I can tell them that too.
To bring, uncle?
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him:
An odd man, lady! every man is odd.
cause, and merry against the hair: he hath the
So I do.
Exeunt AGAMEMNON and NESTOR
Come, tie his body to my horse's tail,
The love that lean'd on them as slippery too,
We have had pelting wars, since you refused
Unfit to hear moral philosophy:
after my name, call them all Pandars, let all
Here is a man--but 'tis before his face,
names as they pass by, but mark Troilus above the rest.
witness. Here I hold your hand, here my cousin's.
Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive.
pageant there is presented no monster.
Where Helen is the subject, then, I say,
Like to an enter'd tide, they all rush by
To-night all friends.
What would you 'fore our tent?
Which entertain'd, limbs are his instruments,
And that unbodied figure of the thought
So shall each lord of Greece, from tent to tent:
This Cressida in Troy? Had she no lover there
Good night and welcome, both at once, to those
answering: speaking is for beggars, he wears his
But the strong base and building of my love
Helenus. I think he went not forth to-day. That's Helenus.
Adieu, uncle.
You told how Diomed, a whole week by days,
Cold statues of the youth, and, in a word,
Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I
I have a young conception in my brain,
Rude, in sooth, in good sooth, very rude.
If then one is, or hath, or means to be,
Never's my day, and then a kiss of you.
Thrice famed, beyond all erudition:
Be ruled by him, Lord Ajax.
Exit
This is not strange, Ulysses.
Why, then, farewell,
Must make perforce an universal prey,
What, what?
wise, no less noble, much more gentle, and altogether
Ay, come:--O Jove!--do come:--I shall be plagued.
begot, bastard instructed, bastard in mind, bastard
That would be rid of such an enemy,
AEneas is a-field,
Or know not what we are.
Your last service was sufferance, 'twas not
Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life.
And do a deed that fortune never did,
Will this gear ne'er be mended?
At Menelaus' tent, most princely Troilus:
Bed, chamber, Pandar to provide this gear!
O wither'd truth!
And drave great Mars to faction.
Come, both you cogging Greeks, have at you both!
Dog!
of Paris my lord, who's there in person, with him,
Their crownets regal, from the Athenian bay
To blench from this and to stand firm by honour:
What's past and what's to come is strew'd with husks
shall have a praise in present: we will not name
Exeunt ACHILLES and PATROCLUS
SCENE IV. Plains between Troy and the Grecian camp.
And choice, being mutual act of all our souls,
to him, it's all one: by God's lid, it does one's
In no less working than are swords and bows
herself swore th' other day, that Troilus, for
and Helen so blushed, an Paris so chafed, and all the
Who!--nay, then: come, come, you'll do him wrong
Why, how now, lord!
What's that? what's that?
'Tis our mad sister, I do know her voice.
were you at Ilium?
In this I do not call your faith in question
As venerable Nestor, hatch'd in silver,
Nor, by my will, assubjugate his merit,
At ample point all that I did possess,
Amphimachus and Thoas deadly hurt,
If I might in entreaties find success--
When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws,
Show not their mealy wings but to the summer,
picture. Alas the day, how loath you are to offend
And foams at mouth, and he is arm'd and at it,
I'll speak it in my spirit and honour, 'no.'
At the port, lord, I'll give her to thy hand,
And signify this loving interview
Love's thrice repured nectar? death, I fear me,
O, he smiles valiantly.
You understand me not that tell me so:
How now, Patroclus!
Thus says AEneas, one that knows the youth
For emulation hath a thousand sons
He fumbles up into a lose adieu,
Why, you know 'tis dimpled: I think his smiling
Behold, distraction, frenzy and amazement,
the women: but, for my part, she is my kinswoman, I
I cannot fight upon this argument,
Troilus will stand to the proof, if you'll
With distinct breath and consign'd kisses to them,
We go wrong, we go wrong.
No? wilt thou not? I like thy armour well,
Give me your hand.
And scants us with a single famish'd kiss,
Patroclus kisses you.
So that the ram that batters down the wall,
Nor dignifies an impure thought with breath,
'Tis said he holds you well, and will be led
They say all lovers swear more performance than they
art changed for Antenor: thou must to thy father,
The fineness of which metal is not found
Tearing the letter
Ay, good my lord. Why should you say Cressida? no,
Handlest in thy discourse, O, that her hand,
Furnish you fairly for this interchange:
I'll heat his blood with Greekish wine to-night,
Heavens, what a man is there! a very horse,
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant:
Cousin, all honour to thee!
Hector! the gods forbid!
It is no matter.
Alarum. Enter AENEAS
As Ariachne's broken woof to enter.
Th' other's not come to't, you shall tell me another
Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe:
Hold you still, I say,
To answer such a question: stand again:
Sans cheque to good and bad: but when the planets
Lest Hector or my father should perceive me,
constant men be Troiluses, all false women Cressids,
And reason flies the object of all harm:
Where is this Hector?
That time, acquaintance, custom and condition
Male varlet, you rogue! what's that?
vein of him.
Patroclus' wounds have roused his drowsy blood,
Your passion draws ears hither.
To call for recompense. Appear it to your mind
Then every thing includes itself in power,
Minds sway'd by eyes are full of turpitude.
While pride is fasting in his wantonness!
The hard and soft seem all affined and kin:
Will have it so. On, lord, we'll follow you.
If ever you prove false one to another, since I have
Count wisdom as no member of the war,
What is aught, but as 'tis valued?
Now, youthful Troilus, do not these high strains
having colour enough, and the other higher, is too
Thou must be my ambassador to him, Thersites.
Who play they to?
Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Why, there you touch'd the life of our design:
Cries 'This is he,' could promise to himself
Die in the fall. But 'tis not so with me:
And danger, like an ague, subtly taints
Where is my brother Hector?
Achilles, Achilles is my lord, I am Patroclus'
Come, to the port. I'll tell thee, Diomed,
I'll cut thy throat.
I'll through and through you! and, thou great-sized coward,
Enter TROILUS
Thou great, and wise, to hear Ulysses speak.
Must be the scene of mirth, to cough and spit,
brain more than he has beat my bones: I will buy
Than Hector is: the wound of peace is surety,
This morning, uncle.
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant,
They lie indrench'd. I tell thee I am mad
Achilles bids you welcome.
Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves:
Lies in his hamstring, and doth think it rich
Thy master now lies thinking in his bed
That next by him beneath, so every step,
'Tis like a chime a-mending, with terms unsquared,
In time of action. I stand condemn'd for this,
Ha!
of idiot worshippers, here's a letter for thee.
I'll stand to-day for thee and me and Troy.
Grow in the veins of actions highest rear'd,
A victor shall be known? will you the knights
Ho! bid my trumpet sound!
I pray you, let us see you in the field:
For this popp'd Paris in his hardiment,
To holy altars.
Flowing and swelling o'er with arts and exercise:
As gentle tell me, of what honour was
If there be rule in unity itself,
Save these men's looks, who do, methinks, find out
lady in the fountain of our love?
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
troubles me, and the foolish fortune of this girl,
Jove bless great Ajax!
Troilus! why, he esteems her no more than I esteem
Why, Paris hath colour enough.
be sworn: for my own part, I came in late. What
I am no more touch'd than all Priam's sons:
Whereof we have record, trial did draw
He's dead, and at the murderer's horse's tail,
Are like to rot untasted. Go and tell him,
And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer,
To match us in comparisons with dirt,
So madly hot that no discourse of reason,
And not a man, for being simply man,
An esperance so obstinately strong,
Farewell. Who shall answer him?
Heat them and they retort that heat again
Fall all together.
The Grecian youths are full of quality,
Sir, pardon, 'tis for Agamemnon's ears.
Love got so sweet as when desire did sue.
Here, here, here he comes.
The large Achilles, on his press'd bed lolling,
And the will dotes that is attributive
Troy in our weakness stands, not in her strength.
No man alive can love in such a sort
marvel where Troilus is. Hark! do you not hear the
Perchance, my lord, I show more craft than love,
Not soon provoked nor being provoked soon calm'd:
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans,
Enter ACHILLES, with Myrmidons
The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break.
Die I a villain, then!
To guard a thing not ours nor worth to us,
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
Out of our virtues, who miscarrying,
Hear while I speak it, love:
And by herself, I will not tell you whose.
But, though I loved you well, I woo'd you not,
A Grecian and his sword, if he do set
Thou art, great lord, my father's sister's son,
Well may we fight for her whom, we know well,
A woman of quick sense.
It is Cassandra.
Crack my clear voice with sobs and break my heart
Fie, fie upon her!
most mighty for thy place and sway,
sides, like a leather jerkin.
I have strong reasons.
tale, when th' other's come to't. Hector shall not
an ox, were nothing, he is both ox and ass. To be a
To angle for your thoughts: but you are wise,
They place before his hand that made the engine,
And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence.
Dear lord, you are full of fair words.
The issue of your proper wisdoms rate,
I do believe thee: live.
Surety secure, but modest doubt is call'd
That were to enlard his fat already pride
Richer than sea and land? O, theft most base,
beast, abide?
As I kiss thee. Nay, do not snatch it from me,
I know your favour, Lord Ulysses, well.
up, was she?
What, comes the general to speak with me?
Till when, go seek thy fortune.
Exit DIOMEDES, ULYSSES and TROILUS following
Troilus, thou coward Troilus, show thy head!
Fails in the promised largeness: cheques and disasters
Is rusty grown: he bade me take a trumpet,
And fell so roundly to a large confession,
O virtuous fight,
I am a bastard too, I love bastards: I am a bastard
Farewell, revolted fair! and, Diomed,
Should be shut up, hear what Ulysses speaks.
The advantage of the time prompts me aloud
look on. That dissembling abominable varlets Diomed,
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.
Because Cassandra's mad: her brain-sick raptures
I'll meddle nor make no more i' the matter.
You scurvy lord!
For many weary months.
Both take and give.
Must tarre the mastiffs on, as 'twere their bone.
Did in great Ilion thus translate him to me.
Why, he stalks up and down like a peacock,--a stride
in truth, la. Nay, I care not for such words, no,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus.
Falling on Diomed.
Tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance,
As banks of Libya,--though, Apollo knows,
No, Paris is not, for you know 'tis true,
Thy lord, Thersites: then tell me, I pray thee,
That quarrels at self-breath: imagined worth
Here come more.
With mill-stones.
SCENE II. The same. Before Calchas' tent.
Ay, but that fool knows not himself.
your poor disposer's sick.
Good morrow, then.
We met by chance, you did not find me here.
him when Hector has knocked out his brains, I know
Then you say as I say, for, I am sure, he is not Hector.
Speak then, thou vinewedst leaven, speak: I will
Thou art too gentle and too free a man:
And being once subdued in armed tail,
I thank thee, Hector
What says Ulysses?
I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels,
Still have I tarried.
I shall cut out your tongue.
But there was more temperate fire under the pot of
And any man may sing her, if he can take her cliff,
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
discipline come not near thee! Let thy blood be thy
Reply not in how many fathoms deep
Who's that?
Good, and what of him?
proclamation, and he rails upon me.
judgments in whosoever, and a proper man of person.
Good Pandarus, how now, Pandarus!
Than ever Greek did compass in his arms,
And say in thunder 'Achilles go to him.'
Shoots buck and doe:
Tortive and errant from his course of growth.
Welcome, brave Hector, welcome, princes all.
Agamemnon,
O, 'tis true.
I doubt he be hurt. Fare ye well, good niece.
I would they could.
In beastly sort, dragg'd through the shameful field.
pageant of Ajax.
No, you see, he is his argument that has his
So to him we leave it.
Paris is dirt to him, and, I warrant, Helen, to
As you, prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business
Enter PANDARUS
Patroclus is a fool positive.
No, Pandarus: I stalk about her door,
How now Ulysses!
Enter CASSANDRA
In the extremity of great and little,
Crying on Hector. Ajax hath lost a friend
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' glove:
Or force of Greekish sinews, you shall do more
What further you will do.
thou to curse thus?
Remuneration for the thing it was,
Ajax offers to beat him
If not Achilles, sir,
Enter DIOMEDES
That thou shalt know. Trojan, he is awake,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
This chaos, when degree is suffocate,
is sweet. Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere
Come, come, beshrew your heart! you'll ne'er be good,
affectionately to you,--
We'll answer it,
And violenteth in a sense as strong
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
Who, Troilus? Troilus is the better man of the two.
A good riddance.
Ha?
Where they're extended, who, like an arch,
of harmony.
What, art thou angry, Pandarus? what, with me?
Have glozed, but superficially: not much
You must prepare to fight without Achilles.
As smiles upon the forehead of this action
My lord, you do discomfort all the host!
Consort with me in loud and dear petition,
A woful Cressid 'mongst the merry Greeks!
More spongy to suck in the sense of fear,
tell what thou art by inches, thou thing of no
Our appertainments, visiting of him:
You may.
I'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
It is the Lord AEneas.
Exit
learning, gentleness, virtue, youth, liberality,
what art thou?
Here lies our way.
Although my will distaste what it elected,
not proved worthy a blackberry: they set me up, in
Which, from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropp'd
No, no, no such matter, you are wide: come, your
Enter PANDARUS
Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome:
The primogenitive and due of birth,
Good uncle, I beseech you, on my knees! beseech you,
Upon our joint and several dignities.
Therefore, come back.
Sperr up the sons of Troy.
Like vassalage at unawares encountering
We'll but commend what we intend to sell.
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge,
As will stop the eye of Helen's needle, for whom he
Should lose their names, and so should justice too.
As sun to day, as turtle to her mate,
Enter AENEAS
How!
To envious and calumniating time.
rare enginer! If Troy be not taken till these two
I cannot conjure, Trojan.
The first was Menelaus' kiss, this, mine:
Wiped off, in honourable keeping her.
is infinite and the execution confined, that the
Within his tent, but ill disposed, my lord.
The sort to fight with Hector: among ourselves
seas, live in fire, eat rocks, tame tigers, thinking
Of good or bad unto the general,
Divert and crack, rend and deracinate
friend, your brother Troilus,--
In Cressid's love: thou answer'st 'she is fair,'
That their negotiations all must slack,
Why, his masculine whore. Now, the rotten diseases
That's true, make no question of that. 'Two and
in a flint, which will not show without knocking.
The Lady Cressida.
Of all rejoindure, forcibly prevents
I thank thee, most imperious Agamemnon.
defend all these: and at all these wards I lie, at a
caduceus, if ye take not that little, little less
Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face,
cause. A word, my lord.
Let me not shame respect, but give me leave
But something may be done that we will not:
Strength should be lord of imbecility,
And I will fill them with prophetic tears.
loathsomest scab in Greece. When thou art forth in
his mouth, and promise, like Brabbler the hound:
Which shipmen do the hurricano call,
Good morrow.
There's not the meanest spirit on our party
Ay, but thou shalt not go.
Through ranks of Greekish youth, and I have seen thee,
This morning to them.
What, blushing still? have you not done talking yet?
Since first I saw yourself and Diomed
Nay, this shall not hedge us out: we'll hear you
Which hath an operation more divine
Well said, adversity! and what need these tricks?
Trumpet sounds
Peace, for shame, peace!
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home,
More dregs than water, if my fears have eyes.
Of her delivery to this valiant Greek
And the rude son should strike his father dead:
I go, my lord.
Foh, foh! come, tell a pin: you are forsworn.
Who's there? what's the matter? will you beat
I do beseech you, as in way of taste,
Lie every man holds dear, but the brave man
Who's that at door? good uncle, go and see.
Whose grossness little characters sum up:
Has not so much wit--
Cressid comes forth to him.
Hark! they are coming from the field: shall we
Re-enter PANDARUS
For we would give much, to use violent thefts,
But if I tell how these two did co-act,
Why no, you ruinous butt, you whoreson
Nay, I'll give my word for her too: our kindred,
I hope I shall know your honour better.
Or made a toast for Neptune. Even so
The proclamation!
son of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts judgment:
villain: she fetches her breath as short as a
Makes factious feasts, rails on our state of war,
Let us address to tend on Hector's heels:
Which is that god in office, guiding men?
bed, which bed, because it shall not speak of your
'What is your parentage?'
face into more lines than is in the new map with the
According to my birth. What do you say?
I am not weary, and 'tis long to night:
My most exquisite Sir Topas!
Husband!
Et vous aussi, votre serviteur.
The quality of persons, and the time,
Haply your eye shall light upon some toy
himself possessed him, yet I'll speak to him.
made, if thou desirest to be so, if not, let me see
Why, what would you?
unthought of and speak out of my injury.
I must have done no less with wit and safety.
yellow stockings, and wished to see thee ever
I do I know not what, and fear to find
of letter did.
so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace. What
with me as the very true sonnet is, 'Please one, and
I hate: I had as lief be a Brownist as a
As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman,
Fie on him, Jezebel!
Re-enter MARIA, with SIR TOBY BELCH and FABIAN
it shines every where. I would be sorry, sir, but
speak with her, nor your name is not Master Cesario,
that are fools, let them use their talents.
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message
What ho, Malvolio!
What is 'Pourquoi'? do or not do? I would I had
with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake
Exit Servant
But for thee, fellow, fellow, thy words are madness:
word for two pence that you are no fool.
If sad and merry madness equal be.
[Singing]
Though, I confess, much like the character
Than you have heard him brag to you he will.
Who saw Cesario, ho?
Why, this is excellent.
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions and spirit,
But falls into abatement and low price,
By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, paper and
A noble duke, in nature as in name.
observe his construction of it. For this night, to
You, sir! why, what are you?
Do you know what you say?
rightly, can ever believe such impossible passages
i' the church. I have dogged him, like his
That were hard to compass,
Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
He is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on
soul being in heaven. Take away the fool, gentlemen.
He shall enlarge him: fetch Malvolio hither:
With such a smooth, discreet and stable bearing
M, O, A, I, this simulation is not as the former: and
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
Soft! and the impressure her Lucrece, with which she
I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
a bench, but he'll speak with you.
Let go thy hand.
and spin it off.
'Tis not so sweet now as it was before.
nights: your cousin, my lady, takes great
ANTONIO: Let me yet know of you whither you are bound.
What's to come is still unsure:
Who shortly also died: for whose dear love,
lady within?
I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.
very competent injury: therefore, get you on and
Placed in contempt! Farewell, fair cruelty.
not deliver't?
the lunatic.
Exit MARIA
My lord and master loves you: O, such love
Exeunt OLIVIA and MARIA
And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
That suffer surfeit, cloyment and revolt,
I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring
Not so, neither, but I am resolved on two points.
Here's the challenge, read it: warrant there's
O, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye!
break, your gaskins fall.
Calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet
hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink and paper:
coziers' catches without any mitigation or remorse
her as long as there is a passage in my throat and
Thou shall present me as an eunuch to him:
The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I
To VIOLA
list of my voyage.
what is 'that' but 'that,' and 'is' but 'is'?
understand so much, and therefore comes to speak
[To OLIVIA]  So comes it, lady, you have been mistook:
put me down. Methinks sometimes I have no more wit
him, and a third drowns him.
tell you, that, though she harbours you as her
I'll be revenged on the whole pack of you.
will keep no fool, sir, till she be married, and
Good Maria, let this fellow be looked to. Where's
'What an if you do?'
Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!
constantly, but a time-pleaser, an affectioned ass,
What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!
She took the ring of me: I'll none of it.
'You must amend your drunkenness.'
But shall we make the welkin dance indeed? shall we
Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump
This will I tell my lady straight: I would not be
O mistress mine, where are you roaming?
Exit
Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by
For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,
acquaintance, I will be point-devise the very man.
publish her, she bore a mind that envy could not but
it at heart! Pray God, he be not bewitched!
Your lord does know my mind, I cannot love him:
To answer by the method, in the first of his heart.
And tell me, in the modesty of honour,
'Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross
piece of Eve's flesh as any in Illyria.
know'st not me.
Where he sits crowned in his master's spite.
Shall I play my freedom at traytrip, and become thy
Nothing but this, your true love for my master.
O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted, I will give
Now is the woodcock near the gin.
God bless thee, lady!
Approach, Sir Andrew: not to be abed after
But this my masculine usurp'd attire,
strangeness and tell me what I shall vent to my
Fortune forbid my outside have not charm'd her!
What is love? 'tis not hereafter,
you should enter, if your trade be to her.
Till thou have audience.
Nor know I you by voice or any feature:
The hart.
Exeunt
I hope, sir, you are, and I am yours.
Pare thy nails, dad,
And so adieu, good madam: never more
That they may fairly note this act of mine!
By my life, this is my lady's hand these be her
SCENE IV. OLIVIA's garden.
And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come
Enter Clown
Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
For such as we are made of, such we be.
Love-thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.
bond-slave?
Exit
soldier, put up your iron: you are well fleshed, come on.
thought a good student, but to be said an honest man
Re-enter MALVOLIO
And cross-gartered?
I am bound to your niece, sir, I mean, she is the
How now, Malvolio!
prove you a fool.
you call in question the continuance of his love:
SCENE V. OLIVIA'S house.
'His eyes do show his days are almost done.'
Aside
understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
Between the elements of air and earth,
Come, boy, with me, my thoughts are ripe in mischief:
Saying, 'Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on
favour with my lady about a bear-baiting here.
You drew your sword upon me without cause,
Sir Toby to look to me! This concurs directly with
Sure, my noble lord,
And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
Would you'ld pardon me,
politician.
By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men
I mean, to go, sir, to enter.
Cries, ah, ha! to the devil:
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,
any image of offence done to any man.
Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?
Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
I will believe thou hast a mind that suits
Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel
What is your name?
I am the man: if it be so, as 'tis,
my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety this
limed her, but it is Jove's doing, and Jove make me
Can you do it?
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
Orsino, this is that Antonio
Smilest thou?
To-day, my lord, and for three months before,
If I did love you in my master's flame,
Ay, but I know--
An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst
report--after fourteen years' purchase.
[Reads]  'By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the
Sad true lover never find my grave,
Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.
I know not, madam: 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.
the fool not dry: bid the dishonest man mend
So thou mayst say, the king lies by a beggar, if a
Here, madam, at your service.
You are resolute, then?
He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.
But, were my worth as is my conscience firm,
place as I would they should do theirs, to for my
Let him approach: call in my gentlewoman.
SCENE III. OLIVIA'S house.
Ass, I doubt not.
'Some are born great,'--
and reins well.
were set at eight i' the morning.
Mistress Mary, if you prized my lady's favour at any
Beshrew me, the knight's in admirable fooling.
Master Malvolio?
Are you ready, sir?
am as well in my wits, fool, as thou art.
O, welcome, father!
dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in?
me, yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as
[Reads]  'I will waylay thee going home, where if it
And then 'twas fresh in murmur,--as, you know,
For the fair kindness you have show'd me here,
I'll be your purse-bearer and leave you
O, stay and hear, your true love's coming,
and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you
Enter DUKE ORSINO, VIOLA, CURIO, and others
Good madam, let me see your face.
You have desire to purchase, and your store,
Go to, you're a dry fool, I'll no more of you:
Make me a willow cabin at your gate,
some commerce with my lady, and will by and by depart.
is done. Now, a song.
Will I my master's tears to you deplore.
To tell me how he takes it. Fare you well:
We men may say more, swear more: but indeed
Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain
And baited it with all the unmuzzled thoughts
You either fear his humour or my negligence, that
Castiliano vulgo! for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.
You mistake, knight, 'accost' is front her, board
I have sent after him: he says he'll come,
thou findest him: I would we were well rid of this
Go off, I discard you: let me enjoy my private: go
Most provident in peril, bind himself,
That makes thee strangle thy propriety:
Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
Lips, do not move,
'I may command where I adore.' Why, she may command
With hey, ho,  and c.
Drew to defend him when he was beset:
Faith, so they say, but I think it rather consists
Enter MARIA and Clown
double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash
know this letter will make a contemplative idiot of
Very brief, and to exceeding good sense--less.
word for word without book, and hath all the good
Like aqua-vitae with a midwife.
To VIOLA
You may have very fit occasion for't: he is now in
Alas the day!
Here is my hand: you shall from this time be
tell thee, I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.
have heard her swear't. Tut, there's life in't,
Your will?
indifferent red, item, two grey eyes, with lids to
Who of my people hold him in delay?
night, when thou spokest of Pigrogromitus, of the
Whereto thy speech serves for authority,
Good Sir Toby!
promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
With hey, ho,  and c.
She could not sway her house, command her followers,
late is to be up late.
With viewing of the town: there shall you have me.
The man grows mad: away with him! Come, come, sir.
SCENE II. OLIVIA's house.
thou not go to church in a galliard and come home in
But out of question 'tis Maria's hand.
dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy preparation, for
have found in any part of Illyria. Will you walk
Myself, my servant and, I fear me, you:
Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see
Enter VALENTINE and VIOLA in man's attire
To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars
That e'er devotion tender'd! What shall I do?
He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side,
conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives
with an old man.
My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that colour.
gentleman till my return.
Did she see thee the while, old boy? tell me that.
A sister! you are she.
Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
Once more, Cesario,
If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow
How now! what news from her?
work with him. I will plant you two, and let the
The form of my intent. I'll serve this duke:
O, prepare it!
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith:
Where lie my maiden weeds, by whose gentle help
Has been told so, and he says, he'll stand at your
In voices well divulged, free, learn'd and valiant,
Nay, let him alone: I'll go another way to work
Hast made thine enemies?
More matter for a May morning.
obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering, but
Why, there's for thee, and there, and there. Are all
And sing them loud even in the dead of night,
From the Count Orsino, is it?
For the rain,  and c.
Marry, and it shall be done to-morrow morning, if I
but if he had not been in drink, he would have
I have't in my nose too.
already, unless you laugh and minister occasion to
For the rain,  and c.
'Be not afraid of greatness:' 'twas well writ.
gown, having come from a day-bed, where I have left
whisper o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.
uses to seal: 'tis my lady. To whom should this be?
Well-a-day that you were, sir
simple syllogism will serve, so, if it will not,
A great while ago the world begun,
Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be content:
dissembled in such a gown. I am not tall enough to
With such a suffering, such a deadly life,
Why, man, he's a very devil, I have not seen such a
Oh, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste
Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse
A thousand thousand sighs to save,
How now, gentleman! how is't with you?
Is't even so?
will not be seen, or if she be, it's four to one
Nay, let me alone for swearing.
Come, Sir Andrew, there's no remedy, the gentleman
Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of
Which I have given to you?
count's serving-man than ever she bestowed upon me,
word might make my sister wanton. But indeed words
With toss-pots still had drunken heads,
SCENE I. Before OLIVIA's house.
Where Love is throned.
rascally sheep-biter come by some notable shame?
If you offend him, I for him defy you.
SCENE I. Before OLIVIA's house.
Exeunt
not worthy to touch Fortune's fingers. Farewell.
of his valour. He is, indeed, sir, the most skilful,
are very rascals since bonds disgraced them.
Methinks his words do from such passion fly,
O, world, how apt the poor are to be proud!
As full of labour as a wise man's art
thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one
For though my soul disputes well with my sense,
Be not offended, dear Cesario.
one, sir, in this interlude, one Sir Topas, sir, but
To any other trust but that I am mad
Wherefore are these things hid? wherefore have
Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
Olivia's father took much delight in. He is about the house.
That have on both sides pass'd.
I'll make division of my present with you:
We will not part from hence. Cesario, come,
Away before me to sweet beds of flowers:
To her in haste, give her this jewel, say,
sayest thou that house is dark?
if you will let your lady know I am here to speak
paper, although the sheet were big enough for the
you. I told him you were sick, he takes on him to
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
Stealing and giving odour! Enough, no more:
Come, come, I'll go burn some sack, 'tis too late
will clog the foot of a flea, I'll eat the rest of
In recompense whereof he hath married her.
cunning in fence, I'ld have seen him damned ere I'ld
What great ones do the less will prattle of,--
Why, would that have mended my hair?
Do't, knight: I'll write thee a challenge: or I'll
To a strong mast that lived upon the sea,
that I dropped to betray him: he does smile his
upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell
Reads
There's something in me that reproves my fault,
Come thy ways, Signior Fabian.
Enter ANTONIO and Officers
And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
I' faith, or I either?
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
everything that thou wilt have me.
They draw
I am as mad as he,
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
Exeunt
Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
And to do that well craves a kind of wit:
Go call him hither.
As I perceive she does: there's something in't
I was preserved to serve this noble count.
house, unless you undertake that with me which with
That, notwithstanding thy capacity
motley in my brain. Good madonna, give me leave to
Exeunt
world needs to fear no colours.
In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,
and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has. In
Hath for your love a great a pang of heart
I prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.
Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow:
Enter Servant
Shall we go see the reliques of this town?
me: the malignancy of my fate might perhaps
looked for at your hand, and this was balked: the
He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look
Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate
Never in your life, I think, unless you see canary
as much safety you might answer him: therefore, on,
'Some achieve greatness,'--
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
E'er since pursue me.
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes:
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid
give him his desire. Back you shall not to the
An elder than herself: so wears she to him,
No. madam, he does nothing but smile: your
And we'll strive to please you every day.
But from her handmaid do return this answer:
am sick, or not at home, what you will, to dismiss it.
must, that's certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.
Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and born
More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife.
Good night, Penthesilea.
Welcome, ass. Now let's have a catch.
Most villanously, like a pedant that keeps a school
Why it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes,
is no whipstock: my lady has a white hand, and the
That is deceiveable. But here the lady comes.
Apt, in good faith, very apt. Well, go thy way, if
ladyship were best to have some guard about you, if
Sooth, but you must.
Sir!
Come away, come away, death,
Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
As love doth give my heart, no woman's heart
if thou thou'st him some thrice, it shall not be
Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool?
You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
him, and on that vice in him will my revenge find
Stand you a while aloof, Cesario,
of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good
moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.
And sight of men.
My niece's chambermaid.
No, my profound heart: and yet, by the very fangs
That he did range the town to seek me out.
with him, I'll have an action of battery against
knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer.
would, are as secret as maidenhead, to your ears,
Come, sir, I pray you, go.
Very sweet and contagious, i' faith.
How with a sportful malice it was follow'd,
you can separate yourself and your misdemeanors, you
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here
Exit
Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge
Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will
Here to unfold, though lately we intended
Exit
I dare lay any money 'twill be nothing yet.
What, ho, I say! peace in this prison!
excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should
Enter SIR ANDREW
Of what personage and years is he?
facit monachum, that's as much to say as I wear not
you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid
may carry it thus, for our pleasure and his penance,
he would quickly have the gift of a grave.
Even now, sir, on a moderate pace I have since
Nor can there be that deity in my nature,
O good Sir Toby, hold! here come the officers.
Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman.
Excellent! I smell a device.
A solemn combination shall be made
Now, the melancholy god protect thee, and the
I hate ingratitude more in a man
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be look'd to.
With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore:
that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness:
Belike you slew great number of his people.
Madman, thou errest: I say, there is no darkness
Of our dear souls. Meantime, sweet sister,
Ay, good fool.
This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you, do me
On his behalf.
excellent at faults.
I know thee well, how dost thou, my good fellow?
Love make his heart of flint that you shall love,
SCENE V. OLIVIA's garden.
Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his
limits of order.
This is a dear manikin to you, Sir Toby.
Past question, for thou seest it will not curl by nature.
you not see you move him? let me alone with him.
He is as horribly conceited of him, and pants and
I'll do my best
caper, ha! higher: ha, ha! excellent!
was a sailor.
Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
Nor hold him up with hopes, I am not for him:
His counsel now might do me golden service,
Re-enter SIR TOBY BELCH, with SIR ANDREW
appear stubborn to him, for she incites me to that
Where is Malvolio? he is sad and civil,
and I'll give him my horse, grey Capilet.
I would you were as I would have you be!
so it skills not much when they are delivered.
all three all ready.
think I have wit enough to lie straight in my bed:
Exit
One day shall crown the alliance on't, so please you,
My lady's a Cataian, we are politicians, Malvolio's
The captain that did bring me first on shore
And call upon my soul within the house,
infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the
would he were, for I am now so far in offence with
Taurus! That's sides and heart.
Well, God give them wisdom that have it, and those
a Cressida to this Troilus.
For she did speak in starts distractedly.
Why, how dost thou, man? what is the matter with thee?
fools in hand?
in some of your coats for two pence.
Hath it not, boy?
are born great, some achieve greatness, and some
Whom the blind waves and surges have devour'd.
comes to speak with you. What is to be said to him,
augmentation of the Indies: you have not seen such
Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and Clown
not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in
you could make it another.
If one should be a prey, how much the better
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes
No, sir, it is legs and thighs. Let me see the
come, who you are and what you would are out of my
For the rain it raineth every day.
will not hurt you. Come on, to't.
and revels sometimes altogether.
But when we know the grounds and authors of it,
O spirit of love! how quick and fresh art thou,
He hath not told us of the captain yet:
Read it you, sirrah.
like my lady your niece: on a forgotten matter we
How can this be?
She made good view of me, indeed, so much,
on. Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yet a
Yet you began rudely. What are you? what would you?
They draw
Set this device against Malvolio here,
Who, with dagger of lath,
Fare ye well at once: my bosom is full of kindness,
With the memorials and the things of fame
Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA
Lay me, O, where
La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes
for some hour before you took me from the breach of
What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two
I too: he does it with a better grace, but I do it
But there's no remedy, I shall answer it.
[Reads]
And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong
And you, sir.
Truly, madam, he holds Belzebub at the staves's end as
her, woo her, assail her.
Poor lady, she were better love a dream.
Feste, the jester, my lord, a fool that the lady
I did impeticos thy gratillity, for Malvolio's nose
send ministers to me, asses, and do all they can to
I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand
O, peace! and the spirit of humour intimate reading
That will allow me very worth his service.
Sir, no, his indignation derives itself out of a
Exit FABIAN
Youth's a stuff will not endure.
Exit
I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar
my hope is better, and so look to thyself. Thy
To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how
His life I gave him and did thereto add
for I never saw her: I would be loath to cast away
Here comes Sir Toby halting, you shall hear more:
Why, I think so: I am not such an ass but I can
And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?
A gracious person: but yet I cannot love him,
break promise with him and make a fool of him.
throat, that is not the matter I challenge thee for.'
Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and
As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the
Exeunt MARIA and Attendants
I saw't i' the orchard.
You have said, sir. To see this age! A sentence is
born in an hour: if the heavens had been pleased,
lustrous as ebony, and yet complainest thou of
Exit SIR ANDREW
That can sing both high and low:
And not all love to see you, though so much
odours on you!
Than what befalls myself. You stand amazed,
I snatch'd one half out of the jaws of death,
In the wars, and that may you be bold to say in your foolery.
Come on, sir, hold.
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,
And what should I do in Illyria?
sport to the upshot. Come by and by to my chamber.
Punish my life for tainting of my love!
What, Curio?
drowned: go, look after him.
Enter VIOLA, and Attendants
That I am Viola: which to confirm,
Re-enter FABIAN and VIOLA
Give me.
the fool should be as oft with your master as with
And anon, sir,
I would, therefore, my sister had had no name, sir.
What money, sir?
A contagious breath.
knave, a thin-faced knave, a gull!
read thus: therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.
This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby
I thank you. Here comes the count.
What will become of this? As I am man,
Why, sir, her name's a word, and to dally with that
clodpole. But, sir, I will deliver his challenge by
his incensement at this moment is so implacable,
And though that nature with a beauteous wall
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would
face me out of my wits.
Not half an hour before.
What wilt thou do?
I'll pay thy pleasure then.
words are grown so false, I am loath to prove
Give me some music. Now, good morrow, friends.
Now, sir, what is your text?
Wherefore, sweet-heart? what's your metaphor?
virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?
You would have been contracted to a maid,
rough, and will not be roughly used.
sun practising behavior to his own shadow this half
draught above heat makes him a fool, the second mads
was never man thus abused. I am no more mad than you
Why, this is very midsummer madness.
Re-enter CURIO and Clown
Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay:
I know of none,
My love can give no place, bide no denay.
You tell her so, must she not then be answer'd?
of his eye, forehead, and complexion, he shall find
Your need to sustain,
with you. I told him you were asleep, he seems to
Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?
Thy reason, man?
O Lord!
Nay, come, I prithee, would thou'ldst be ruled by me!
Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on:
Let him be the devil, an he will, I care not: give
What we took from them, which, for traffic's sake,
Come, let's see the event.
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty:
Wit, an't be thy will, put me into good fooling!
scarce to be worth talking of: therefore draw, for
I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes
Dexterously, good madonna.
An I thought that, I'ld forswear it. I'll ride home
What a plague means my niece, to take the death of
Do give thee five-fold blazon: not too fast:
Present mirth hath present laughter,
After the last enchantment you did here,
I'll give't him.
This practise hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee,
I will help you to't. But tell me true, are you
God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so and kiss
adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no
thy tabour?
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and fill'd
If music be the food of love, play on,
bloody and fatal opposite that you could possibly
folly! I am afraid this great lubber, the world,
Excellent good, i' faith.
When that is known and golden time convents,
Hath kill'd the flock of all affections else
Exit
constrained in't to call thee knave, knight.
But when I came, alas! to wive,
or unsafe circumstance--What can be said? Nothing
M, O, A, I, doth sway my life.
thy assailant is quick, skilful and deadly.
Advise you what you say, the minister is here.
To spite a raven's heart within a dove.
Throws down a letter
Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio
Madam!
consider, he's an enemy to mankind.
This comes with seeking you:
Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound,
Ay, madam.
'O no, no, no, no, you dare not.'
Excellently done, if God did all.
Save in the constant image of the creature
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
I can say little more than I have studied, and that
did come to his hands, and commands shall be
What a caterwauling do you keep here! If my lady
have challenged him. Let him let the matter slip,
Cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.
must know of me then, Antonio, my name is Sebastian,
Marry, hang thee, brock!
well-favoured and he speaks very shrewishly, one
If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.
letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no
My father had a mole upon his brow.
Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we!
SCENE III. OLIVIA's house.
a-hungry, to challenge him the field, and then to
For women are as roses, whose fair flower
inventoried, and every particle and utensil
What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl?
But died thy sister of her love, my boy?
early: so that to go to bed after midnight is to go
That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
ACT IV
to be turned away, is not that as good as a hanging to you?
No way but gentleness, gently, gently: the fiend is
a coward, but he's the very devil incardinate.
Why, how now, my bawcock! how dost thou, chuck?
every thing and their intent every where, for that's
Strengthen'd by interchangement of your rings,
than a Christian or an ordinary man has: but I am a
That defence thou hast, betake thee to't: of what
Would you have a love-song, or a song of good life?
careful man and a great scholar. The competitors enter.
O that I served that lady
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
But let concealment, like a worm i' the bud,
Enter SEBASTIAN
your ladyship. I have your own letter that induced
An you love me, let's do't: I am dog at a catch.
With the same 'havior that your passion bears
In nature there's no blemish but the mind,
Which I had recommended to his use
Most freely I confess, myself and Toby
My masters, are you mad? or what are you? Have ye
of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
a foolish knight,'--
Gracious Olivia,--
What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent,
A bawbling vessel was he captain of,
Exit
'Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou
hand, my words are as fun of peace as matter.
But such a headstrong potent fault it is,
write with a goose-pen, no matter: about it.
Exit
Lechery! I defy lechery. There's one at the gate.
M,--Malvolio, M,--why, that begins my name.
Enter VALENTINE
THE MADLY-USED MALVOLIO.'
Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?
thee for't.
Set forth in your pursuit.
Enter OLIVIA and Attendants
And your horse now would make him an ass.
leave that I may bear my evils alone: it were a bad
An you part so, mistress, I would I might never
Enter SEBASTIAN
Be you his eunuch, and your mute I'll be:
Re-enter MARIA, with MALVOLIO
I have no exquisite reason for't, but I have reason
[Reads]  'To the unknown beloved, this, and my good
I shall have share in this most happy wreck.
for this uncivil rule: she shall know of it, by this hand.
stooping for, there it lies in your eye, if not, be
into stitches, follow me. Yond gull Malvolio is
My love, without retention or restraint,
Shall not behold her face at ample view,
Mayst smile at this: thou shalt not choose but go:
Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you?
Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with them?
'Tis but fortune, all is fortune. Maria once told
Ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a
notable cause to work.
God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the
In this uncivil and thou unjust extent
sir? not I, sir. God be wi' you, good Sir Topas.
Merry, amen. I will, sir, I will.
lady. Tell me your mind: I am a messenger.
Enter VIOLA, a Captain, and Sailors
Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?
SCENE I. The sea-coast.
welkin, I might say 'element,' but the word is over-worn.
opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants, let
ACT III
Hath been between this lady and this lord.
And in sad cypress let me be laid,
I did some service, of such note indeed,
'If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I
There's a testril of me too: if one knight give a--
Farewell, and take her, but direct thy feet
out divers schedules of my beauty: it shall be
touch of modesty, that you will not extort from me
him, draw, and, as thou drawest swear horrible, for
How have you made division of yourself?
No, my lord, not I.
and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a
on't: this shall end without the perdition of souls.
That severs day from night.
bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a
For but a month ago I went from hence,
There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,
your niece give me this prerogative of speech,'--
She sat like patience on a monument,
nor this is not my nose neither. Nothing that is so is so.
And let your fervor, like my master's, be
What's that?
That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard
Being skilless in these parts, which to a stranger,
Not a friend, not a friend greet
son should be a fool, whose skull Jove cram with
Give us the place alone: we will hear this divinity.
And all those sayings will I overswear,
Do I stand there? I never had a brother,
So could I too.
penned, I have taken great pains to con it. Good
Yes, and shall do till the pangs of death shake him:
thee a steward still, the fellow of servants, and
Nay, but say true, does it work upon him?
Excellent wench, say I.
distemper yours, therefore I shall crave of you your
Exeunt all, except Clown
'Alas, why is she so?'
Sowter will cry upon't for all this, though it be as
O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.
A false conclusion: I hate it as an unfilled can.
tales of me. I am bound to the Count Orsino's court: farewell.
I warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.
Give me your hand, sir.
abhors, and cross-gartered, a fashion she detests,
But when I came to man's estate,
all, and he gives me the stuck in with such a mortal
Enter Priest
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons,
'Slid, I'll after him again and beat him.
How with mine honour may I give him that
Save you, gentleman.
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
Tell her, my love, more noble than the world,
That honour saved may upon asking give?
My father had a daughter loved a man,
it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath, with a
Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.
Might well have given us bloody argument.
bed, and dream on the event. Farewell.
leman: hadst it?
Why, then, methinks 'tis time to smile again.
Now will not I deliver his letter: for the behavior
Faith, I'll home to-morrow, Sir Toby: your niece
I left no ring with her: what means this lady?
Whence came you, sir?
late, she did praise my leg being cross-gartered,
I know not what 'twas but distraction.
This pearl she gave me, I do feel't and see't,
Daylight and champaign discovers not more: this is
towards him? I will make your peace with him if I
A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than
'Shall I bid him go, and spare not?'
He shall see none to fear.
degree of my betters, and yet I will not compare
As plain as I see you now.
Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,
You might do much.
I shall never begin if I hold my peace.
bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now
Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou
a thing as 'tis. I can hardly forbear hurling things
Music
Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her,
Maintain no words with him, good fellow. Who, I,
a hare: his dishonesty appears in leaving his
I am a gentleman.' I'll be sworn thou art,
Good fool, for my brother's death.
money for thee: if you tarry longer, I shall give
Most wonderful!
By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o'
Reads
crammed, as he thinks, with excellencies, that it is
beauties, let me sustain no scorn, I am very
Once, in a sea-fight, 'gainst the count his galleys
Fool, fool, fool, I say!
When your young nephew Titus lost his leg:
Prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily
him, foul collier!
Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
Go you, Malvolio: if it be a suit from the count, I
Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this lethargy?
Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heard
have banged the youth into dumbness. This was
you have reason, be brief: 'tis not that time of
her fool, but her corrupter of words.
exalted respect than any one else that follows her.
Why, 'some are born great, some achieve greatness,
that suffers under probation A should follow but O does.
Why, let her except, before excepted.
the courtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office.
unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a
I could marry this wench for this device.
that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death
Hath my maid's garments: he upon some action
Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery,
Inhabits our frail blood.
Clock strikes
modest terms, for I am one of those gentle ones
leg, it was formed under the star of a galliard.
but, as you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap, I
cast thy humble slough and appear fresh. Be
modest assurance if you be the lady of the house,
Fool, I'll requite it in the highest degree: I
But when in other habits you are seen,
She will attend it better in thy youth
Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young
By mine honour, half drunk. What is he at the gate, cousin?
to reserve. But this is from my commission: I will
How shall I feast him? what bestow of him?
obstruction?
Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
After him I love
friend here in necessity and denying him, and for
The parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her,
Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty,
Never trust me, then, and by all means stir on the
I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a
firago. I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard and
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA
And might not be delivered to the world,
Sad, lady! I could be sad: this does make some
Exit
In a trice,
Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN
people dislike it.
Taste your legs, sir, put them to motion.
An apple, cleft in two, is not more twin
if you hold your life at any price, betake you to
Notorious wrong.
Come, sir, away.
her brother thus? I am sure care's an enemy to life.
judgment and reason.
What employment have we here?
What, what?
nayword, and make him a common recreation, do not
'Go to thou art made, if thou desirest to be so,'--
In women's waxen hearts to set their forms!
I think, is not for idle markets, sir.
the Egyptians in their fog.
Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art
Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino.
And that I owe Olivia.
Of very ill manner, he'll speak with you, will you or no.
Enter MARIA
Sweet Sir Andrew!
That I have done for you.
'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white
Of thine own cause.
The knave counterfeits well, a good knave.
that give fools money get themselves a good
I will be free from thee. What wouldst thou now? If
great man and now applies it to a fool. Vent my
Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged: good Sir
Vent my folly! he has heard that word of some
Give me now leave to leave thee.
Prizes not quantity of dirty lands,
Go, hang yourselves all! you are idle shallow
One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more
They have here propertied me, keep me in darkness,
No such matter, sir: I do live by the church, for
conduct of the lady. I am no fighter. I have heard
Enter MARIA
his cowardship, ask Fabian.
tinkers at this time of night? Do ye make an
Yet there he was, and there I found this credit,
Now go with me and with this holy man
these boots too: an they be not, let them hang
Prithee, read i' thy right wits.
Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and
with a distempered appetite. To be generous,
This will so fright them both that they will kill
If this letter move him not, his legs cannot:
Methought she purged the air of pestilence!
thy hand so oft?
yet, to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for
I was adored once too.
the image of it leaves him he must run mad.
And so is now, or was so very late,
Notable pirate! thou salt-water thief!
What kind of woman is't?
steward? Dost thou think, because thou art
his form, as you are like to find him in the proof
With adorations, fertile tears,
My brother he is in Elysium.
the letter: she sends him on purpose, that I may
You can say none of this: well, grant it then
me.
fool him black and blue: shall we not, Sir Andrew?
More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth,
pickle-herring! How now, sot!
Now, sir, have I met you again? there's for you.
Now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.
Is now in durance, at Malvolio's suit,
Did share it.
What's she?
No, believe me.
Enter MALVOLIO
The nonpareil of beauty!
By maidhood, honour, truth and every thing,
Will you encounter the house? my niece is desirous
Hold, there's expenses for thee.
When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
Excellent! why, this is the best fooling, when all
If spirits can assume both form and suit
But it becomes me well enough, does't not?
more approbation than ever proof itself would have
that resemble something in me,--Softly! M, O, A,
Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death,
Not three hours' travel from this very place.
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage,
my mistress: I think I saw your wisdom there.
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption
great eater of beef and I believe that does harm to my wit.
never draw sword again.
The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but
take note of it, and assure thyself, there is no
I have said too much unto a heart of stone
me in manners the rather to express myself. You
Exit
word of mouth, set upon Aguecheek a notable report
Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.
bestowed that time in the tongues that I have in
Fare you well, gentlemen.
My part of death, no one so true
And speak to him in many sorts of music
The rather by these arguments of fear,
If that the injuries be justly weigh'd
A good note, that keeps you from the blow of the law.
That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.
Well, sir, for want of other idleness, I'll bide your proof.
What time we will our celebration keep
They say, poor gentleman, he's much distract.
Or say 'tis not your seal, nor your invention:
Much in our vows, but little in our love.
up watch, or play with my--some rich jewel. Toby
You should find better dealing. What's to do?
For the love o' God, peace!
On your attendance, my lord, here.
Fool!
fool make a third, where he shall find the letter:
Into the danger of this adverse town,
I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this
knavery. If he may be conveniently delivered, I
That strain again! it had a dying fall:
Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
Enter VIOLA, and Clown with a tabour
She loves me, sure, the cunning of her passion
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
I understand you, sir, 'tis well begged.
not, but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as
'No man must know.' What follows? the numbers
my lady talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish
conscience, sir, I do not care for you: if that be
nothing but rail, nor no railing in a known discreet
That youth's a rare courtier: 'Rain odours,' well.
You do mistake me, sir.
Look, where the youngest wren of nine comes.
and by my friends, I am abused: so that,
A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count
Those wits, that think they have thee, do very oft
What else may hap to time I will commit,
Is this the madman?
she'll none of me: the count himself here hard by woos her.
Why, man?
With the most noble bottom of our fleet,
As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war:
I can no other answer make but thanks,
A gentleman.
Exit
presence still smile, dear my sweet, I prithee.'
can hardly make distinction of our hands.
She returns this ring to you, sir: you might have
To bed! ay, sweet-heart, and I'll come to thee.
Will you deny me now?
I knew 'twas I, for many do call me fool.
In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
Under your hard construction must I sit,
make me tell them how much I lack of a man.
I think his soul is in hell, madonna.
I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love,
valour. Challenge me the count's youth to fight
Your master quits you, and for your service done him,
Re-enter SIR TOBY BELCH and FABIAN
nothing, and that that I did, I was set on to do't
the supportance of his vow, he protests he will not hurt you.
Gentlewoman, my lady calls.
To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
Exit
Ah, rogue!
Exeunt
He might have took his answer long ago.
Well said, Master Parson.
I think it well, my lord.
I thank thee: lead me on.
I prithee, gentle friend,
In the sweet pangs of it remember me,
So sways she level in her husband's heart:
saved me my pains, to have taken it away yourself.
Exit MALVOLIO
Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother,
my speech, for besides that it is excellently well
'My lady is unkind, perdy.'
I am a gentleman.
of malice I swear, I am not that I play. Are you
to Sir Toby.
Still in this fashion, colour, ornament,
Re-enter MARIA
My legs do better understand me, sir, than I
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
But am in that dimension grossly clad
to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to
For they shall yet belie thy happy years,
Exit CURIO. Music plays
I must entreat of you some of that money.
Enter ANTONIO
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones
on with my speech in your praise, and then show you
But O how vile an idol proves this god
To VIOLA
No interim, not a minute's vacancy,
half of my dowry.
No, madam, I do but read madness: an your ladyship
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Jove knows I love: But who?
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else,
You're servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
O, say so, and so be!
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.
That live in her, when liver, brain and heart,
'Shall I bid him go?'
[Sings]
demure travel of regard, telling them I know my
At your request! yes, nightingales answer daws.
Were not you even now with the Countess Olivia?
off.
war, no taxation of homage: I hold the olive in my
There's for thy pains.
Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
and some have greatness thrown upon them.' I was
But, since you make your pleasure of your pains,
opinion of his rage, skill, fury and impetuosity.
Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.
That old and antique song we heard last night:
Your were is alike to reap a proper man:
time in you?
cannot hale them together. For Andrew, if he were
That do renown this city.
Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
Out, scab!
You must not now deny it is your hand:
Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Of what validity and pitch soe'er,
Here comes the little villain.
Christian, that means to be saved by believing
youth, strength, skill and wrath can furnish man withal.
Three months this youth hath tended upon me,
To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion.
We'll call thee at the cubiculo: go.
Sir, I bade them take away you.
Nay, that's certain, they that dally nicely with
Where manners ne'er were preach'd! out of my sight!
Our shows are more than will, for still we prove
By innocence I swear, and by my youth
I am gone, sir,
Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp
attends your ladyship's pleasure.
Come, away!
I'll be with you anon.
herrings, the husband's the bigger: I am indeed not
strong, or so.
and vouchsafed ear.
It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing
Not meaning to partake with me in danger,
hope to see a housewife take thee between her legs
I will acquit you.
As great as that thou fear'st.
To him, Sir Topas.
Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight: since the
The appetite may sicken, and so die.
to me: my remembrance is very free and clear from
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
Whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear,
can.
thought on,
on a Dutchman's beard, unless you do redeem it by
Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes my
O, 'twill be admirable!
Pox on't, I'll not meddle with him.
let thy tongue tang with arguments of state, put
That's me, I warrant you.
For saying so, there's gold:
I love thee so, that, maugre all thy pride,
And say 'Thrice-welcome, drowned Viola!'
[Reads]  'Fare thee well, and God have mercy upon
flame-coloured stock. Shall we set about some revels?
M,--but then there is no consonancy in the sequel,
smile with an austere regard of control,--
There is example for't, the lady of the Strachy
Let all the rest give place.
Good madonna, why mournest thou?
That say thou art a man: Diana's lip
'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
SCENE III. OLIVIA's garden.
better increasing your folly! Sir Toby will be
the people mad?
O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
out for him: I frown the while, and perchance wind
I do assure you, 'tis against my will.
had rather go with sir priest than sir knight: I
My lord so please you, these things further
I'll make the motion: stand here, make a good show
SCENE IV. DUKE ORSINO's palace.
Topas, do not think I am mad: they have laid me
his grounds of faith that all that look on him love
'But I will never die.'
here in hideous darkness.
tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for
SCENE IV. DUKE ORSINO's palace.
one of my friends.
Now, sir, 'thought is free:' I pray you, bring
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
desires to speak with you.
Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsino's is
Exit
yourself, for what is yours to bestow is not yours
Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Antonio, then?
While one would wink, denied me mine own purse,
And in such forms which here were presupposed
saying is, the third pays for all: the triplex,
gifts of nature.
o' the toe like a parish-top. What, wench!
to bed betimes. Does not our life consist of the
pass for a wise man: for what says Quinapalus?
It shall become thee well to act my woes,
motion, that it is inevitable, and on the answer, he
O heavens themselves!
will awake it anon.
That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answer'd.
transgresses is but patched with sin, and sin that
every one of these letters are in my name. Soft!
now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass: so that by
But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems
For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause,
niece is already in the belief that he's mad: we
Enter MARIA and Clown
scarce hold him yonder.
And lasting in her sad remembrance.
Where being apprehended, his false cunning,
You can fool no more money out of me at this throw:
Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
tabour, if thy tabour stand by the church.
Re-enter Clown with a letter, and FABIAN
Send for money, knight: if thou hast her not i'
constancy put to sea, that their business might be
Enter Clown and FABIAN
That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue,
your guard, for your opposite hath in him what
Confine! I'll confine myself no finer than I am:
I may command where I adore,
better in your wits than a fool.
my cousin Toby? Let some of my people have a special
Sir Toby Belch! how now, Sir Toby Belch!
bibble babble.
By swaggering could I never thrive,
Exeunt
much out of quiet. For Monsieur Malvolio, let me
or strip your sword stark naked, for meddle you
Attested by the holy close of lips,
Sir Toby, I must be round with you. My lady bade me
'M, O, A, I, doth sway my life.' Nay, but first, let
No, indeed, sir, the Lady Olivia has no folly: she
extravagancy. But I perceive in you so excellent a
Here comes the countess: now heaven walks on earth.
In his rage and his wrath,
Exit MARIA
With drinking healths to my niece: I'll drink to
you farewell.
To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
Tempests are kind and salt waves fresh in love.
great P's. It is, in contempt of question, her hand.
Enter SIR ANDREW
Here he is, here he is. How is't with you, sir?
of virtue, answer me.
Exit
To FABIAN
A ring in chase of you: so did I abuse
[Reads]  'Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind,
And, acting this in an obedient hope,
Is not more smooth and rubious, thy small pipe
Do not then walk too open.
Will you go hunt, my lord?
How now! art thou mad?
for turning away, let summer bear it out.
But do you remember? 'Madam, why laugh you at such
What my estate is!
her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit, I
A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it.
And so had mine.
but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled than
wishes:'--her very phrases! By your leave, wax.
Exit
I do perceive it hath offended you:
'be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants,
yet, a barful strife!
No, good swabber, I am to hull here a little
guiltless and of free disposition, is to take those
Get you to your lord,
Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
Fate, show thy force: ourselves we do not owe,
of. He left behind him myself and a sister, both
And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.
Come hither, boy: if ever thou shalt love,
ACT I
coz, for he's in the third degree of drink, he's
Good, i' faith. Come, begin.
Be clamorous and leap all civil bounds
To force that on you, in a shameful cunning,
For youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd.
morning, but as a madman's epistles are no gospels,
prove fools, and I, that am sure I lack thee, may
Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
Reads
What relish is in this? how runs the stream?
that alphabetical position portend? If I could make
with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits
for a challenge.
When time hath sow'd a grizzle on thy case?
fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to
Thou know'st no less but all, I have unclasp'd
Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and MARIA
For shallow draught and bulk unprizable,
So please my lord, I might not be admitted,
thyself into the trick of singularity,' and
O peace, peace, peace! now, now.
of him: how he jets under his advanced plumes!
I bade you never speak again of him:
For such as I am all true lovers are,
By my troth, I would not undertake her in this
Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me,
I thank you for your pains: spend this for me.
Heaven restore thee!
We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up!
If nothing lets to make us happy both
Exeunt
and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that
Too well what love women to men may owe:
mouth too.
Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
That screws me from my true place in your favour,
Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you:
question's out of my part. Good gentle one, give me
Sir, I have not you by the hand.
off, and you are now sailed into the north of my
SCENE III. A street.
negligence, nothing of my purpose.
endeavour thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain
be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and
As hell, Sir Topas.
Enter VIOLA, MALVOLIO following
great presage of cruelty.
Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
Where, good Mistress Mary?
I speak too loud.
please all.'
Where goes Cesario?
Well, I'll put it on, and I will dissemble myself
We shall have a rare letter from him: but you'll
And, like the haggard, cheque at every feather
with an ordinary fool that has no more brain
see thee so put down?
We had conceived against him: Maria writ
Exeunt Clown, FABIAN, SIR TOBY BELCH, and SIR ANDREW
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
orchard like a bum-baily: so soon as ever thou seest
himself most feelingly personated. I can write very
I have persuaded him the youth's a devil.
To the Elephant.
divinity, to any other's, profanation.
'Odours,' 'pregnant' and 'vouchsafed:' I'll get 'em
Than women's are.
How easy is it for the proper-false
and he will smile upon her, which will now be so
ignorance were as dark as hell, and I say, there
And make the babbling gossip of the air
For this affair. Some four or five attend him,
Exit
I would not by my will have troubled you,
love-broker in the world can more prevail in man's
he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he
Her C's, her U's and her T's: why that?
And, part, being prompted by your present trouble,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
To die, even when they to perfection grow!
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
gown: he sees thee not.
I'll follow this good man, and go with you,
That if one break, the other will hold, or, if both
altered! 'No man must know:' if this should be
That very oft we pity enemies.
I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come
Ay, is't, I warrant him: do but read.
he's a very fool and a prodigal.
Give me my veil: come, throw it o'er my face.
to go to bed now: come, knight, come, knight.
Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times:
I must catechise you for it, madonna: good my mouse
Did I expose myself, pure for his love,
The county's man: he left this ring behind him,
Here, wear this jewel for me, 'tis my picture,
How will she love, when the rich golden shaft
I could not stay behind you: my desire,
Pistol him, pistol him.
Not a flower, not a flower sweet
This is the man, do thy office.
that will use the devil himself with courtesy:
Than music from the spheres.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
it that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.
letter to you, I should have given't you to-day
labelled to my will: as, item, two lips,
Write from it, if you can, in hand or phrase,
Have you not set mine honour at the stake
Taking up the letter
How have the hours rack'd and tortured me,
and let your flesh and blood obey it.
put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver.
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth,
some laudable attempt either of valour or policy.
The devil a puritan that he is, or any thing
And those swearings keep as true in soul
Will you help? an ass-head and a coxcomb and a
Think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little
Enter OLIVIA and MARIA
what o' that?
Madam, I will.
their hands, let thy blood and spirit embrace them,
When came he to this town?
But be of comfort.
I have many enemies in Orsino's court,
kinsman Toby,--
The like of him. Know'st thou this country?
What country, friends, is this?
hath in quarrelling, 'tis thought among the prudent
Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
Would I or not: tell him I'll none of it.
How now, my hearts! did you never see the picture
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither:
Unless the master were the man. How now!
executed: I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.
married the yeoman of the wardrobe.
though I could not with such estimable wonder
And then to have the humour of state, and after a
All, if you will, for I myself am best
sight she uses thee kindly: but thou liest in thy
Go to, go to, peace, peace, we must deal gently
His very genius hath taken the infection of the device, man.
Still so cruel?
That face of his I do remember well,
cooling when 'tis almost an apple: 'tis with him
Plight me the full assurance of your faith,
Here comes the fool, i' faith.
better fool.
Hast thou forgot thyself? is it so long?
drink in Illyria: he's a coward and a coystrill
Enter DUKE ORSINO, CURIO, and Attendants
And then I comes behind.
Thou shalt not be the worse for me: there's gold.
aloud to him!
No man must know.
On my black coffin let there be strown,
Still you keep o' the windy side of the law: good.
Enter OLIVIA with MALVOLIO
Bonos dies, Sir Toby: for, as the old hermit of
There lies your way, due west.
Exit
tickled you othergates than he did.
Alas, sir, be patient. What say you sir? I am
Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people,
Give me thy hand,
ACT II
You come to fright us.
Come, but one verse.
With this thy fair and outward character.
If that the youth will come this way to-morrow,
Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived,
Fire and brimstone!
My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye
What would my lord, but that he may not have,
But, if you were the devil, you are fair.
Fool, I say!
your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink.
What is decreed must be, and be this so.
As howling after music.
Come hither, knight, come hither, Fabian: we'll
The count's gentleman, one Cesario: we took him for
I should your lordship.
Relieved him with such sanctity of love,
amends is but patched with virtue. If that this
the end, call me cut.
Between that love a woman can bear me
it his that finds it.
Too old by heaven: let still the woman take
None of my lord's ring! why, he sent her none.
Though I confess, on base and ground enough,
Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest
Nay, my troth, I know not: but I know, to be up
Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly
[Singing]
Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady.
I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman:
Tell me how thy lady does.'
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
SCENE II. A street.
What dish o' poison has she dressed him!
Do, cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.
these gifts a curtain before 'em? are they like to
Exit
A brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh
But mine is all as hungry as the sea,
Lest that it make me so unsound a man
What kind o' man is he?
melancholy as she is, that it cannot but turn him
Could be but recompensed, though you were crown'd
Ay, Biddy, come with me. What, man! 'tis not for
It might have since been answer'd in repaying
I have travell'd but two hours.
Save thee, friend, and thy music: dost thou live by
That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?
And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,
Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness:
Faith, I can cut a caper.
And dallies with the innocence of love,
Would it be better, madam, than I am?
If you will lead these graces to the grave
the heart of my message.
be thy chance to kill me,'--
evident to any formal capacity, there is no
All the occurrence of my fortune since
kill him whom you have recovered, desire it not.
rouse the night-owl in a catch that will draw three
The honourable lady of the house, which is she?
And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,
Bade me come smiling and cross-garter'd to you,
What think you of this fool, Malvolio? doth he not mend?
'She loves another'--Who calls, ha?
More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
Into the chantry by: there, before him,
What do you say, Cesario? Good my lord,--
But nature to her bias drew in that.
For which, if I be lapsed in this place,
And yet, when wit and youth is come to harvest,
It is too hard a knot for me to untie!
'Tis in grain, sir, 'twill endure wind and weather.
friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy,
me to the semblance I put on, with the which I doubt
And can digest as much: make no compare
Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much
[Reads]  'Thou comest to the lady Olivia, and in my
of grossness. He's in yellow stockings.
looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.
And this is he that did the Tiger board,
Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come
Will you hoist sail, sir? here lies your way.
Come, we'll have him in a dark room and bound. My
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream:
Where shall I find you?
And laid mine honour too unchary out:
Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song,
keep my hand dry. But what's your jest?
Fool!
Make that good.
said to a niece of King Gorboduc, 'That that is is,'
And O shall end, I hope.
Take and give back affairs and their dispatch
How now, my metal of India!
I am not mad, Sir Topas: I say to you, this house is dark.
Than in a nuncio's of more grave aspect.
That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.
hate a drunken rogue.
For him, I think not on him: for his thoughts,
He named Sebastian: I my brother know
terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a
that can be can come between me and the full
Here he comes with your niece: give them way till
A love-song, a love-song.
the anatomy.
beggar dwell near him, or, the church stands by thy
Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest
Like a drowned man, a fool and a mad man: one
To weep there!
Be not denied access, stand at her doors,
What's the matter?
exceptions to your ill hours.
Exit with Officers
within, sir. I will construe to them whence you
So I do, madonna, but to read his right wits is to
[Reads]  'Thou killest me like a rogue and a villain.'
Cross-gartered!
In your denial I would find no sense,
have not called up her steward Malvolio and bid him
will prove a cockney. I prithee now, ungird thy
I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.
habit of some sir of note, and so forth. I have
Marian, I say! a stoup of wine!
Tillyvally. Lady!
he'll smile and take't for a great favour.
If the duke continue these favours towards you,
What manner of man?
May live at peace. He shall conceal it
and the clearstores toward the south north are as
care of him: I would not have him miscarry for the
For such disguise as haply shall become
on't. Sot, didst see Dick surgeon, sot?
My soul the faithfull'st offerings hath breathed out
and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
About your years, my lord.
no wit, manners, nor honesty, but to gabble like
Perchance he is not drown'd: what think you, sailors?
not but to do myself much right, or you much shame.
A spirit I am indeed,
Madam!
Do use to chant it: it is silly sooth,
Ay, marry, what is he?
[Sings]
Yes, being kept together and put to use.
Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune,
And with what wing the staniel cheques at it!
And you, sir.
Any thing.
is, sure, possessed, madam.
the sea was my sister drowned.
Most sweet lady,--
So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
O, that record is lively in my soul!
opened, and you find so much blood in his liver as
Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought,
Enter SIR ANDREW, SIR TOBY BELCH, and FABIAN
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,
Alas, I took great pains to study it, and 'tis poetical.
O, I have read it: it is heresy. Have you no more to say?
Halloo your name to the reverberate hills
very good, i' faith. I sent thee sixpence for thy
He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop,
Let her hang me: he that is well hanged in this
This is much credit to you.
He hath indeed, almost natural: for besides that
To keep in darkness what occasion now
My matter hath no voice, to your own most pregnant
What sayest thou?
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
This savours not much of distraction.
Let me be clear of thee.
O, ho! do you come near me now? no worse man than
That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.
thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will
My lord would speak, my duty hushes me.
thy tongue tang arguments of state, put thyself into
Madam, I will.
Then he's a rogue, and a passy measures panyn: I
I'll be with you again,
Write loyal cantons of contemned love
Did he write this?
Not so, sir, I do care for something, but in my
Ha!
O knight thou lackest a cup of canary: when did I
Tell him he shall not speak with me.
If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
Sir, shall I to this lady?
Ay, he.
He has broke my head across and has given Sir Toby
now I let go your hand, I am barren.
prospect of my hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is the
help! I had rather than forty pound I were at home.
But, would you undertake another suit,
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN
An we do not, it is pity of our lives.
If this were played upon a stage now, I could
Rudesby, be gone!
Sings
consequently sets down the manner how, as, a sad
A blank, my lord. She never told her love,
thy mind is a very opal. I would have men of such
Like the old age.
Are you a comedian?
To think me as well a sister as a wife,
She's a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me:
Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all
THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.'
to care for nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible.
thing more than contempt, you would not give means
Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me,
Cesario, you are like to be much advanced: he hath
Exit
thy smiles become thee well, therefore in my
Ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do
Cried fame and honour on him. What's the matter?
become the function well, nor lean enough to be
will have it as it ought to be, you must allow Vox.
talkest thou nothing but of ladies?
[Reads]
With hey, ho,  and c.
A contract of eternal bond of love,
'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate,
A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.
very C's, her U's and her T's and thus makes she her
lady's opinion, where you will hang like an icicle
Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore!
The element itself, till seven years' heat,
Why, we shall make him mad indeed.
Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and
Here at my house and at my proper cost.
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me:
turned heathen, a very renegado, for there is no
draw sword again. Fair lady, do you think you have
O thou dissembling cub! what wilt thou be
Exeunt
you sent hither to praise me?
They that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.
and in this she manifests herself to my love, and
True, madam: and, to comfort you with chance,
I will return again into the house and desire some
O, peace! now he's deeply in: look how
lady: shall I vent to her that thou art coming?
Ay, my lord, this same.
That you do think you are not what you are.
And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.
Thou dost speak masterly:
allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock, lest
alone with him: if I do not gull him into a
Peace, peace!
What will you do, now my necessity
Having been three months married to her, sitting in
'Hold thy peace, thou knave,' knight? I shall be
world shall know it: though you have put me into
We'll once more hear Orsino's embassy.
Nay, I'll come: if I lose a scruple of this sport,
To-morrow, sir: best first go see your lodging.
Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,
But this your minion, whom I know you love,
My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown:
Go shake your ears.
what remedy? As there is no true cuckold but
Re-enter MARIA
Do not desire to see this letter.
Peace, I say.
My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world
Ay, that's the theme.
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
so I, being Master Parson, am Master Parson, for,
Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,
Prove true, imagination, O, prove true,
what of that? if it please the eye of one, it is
why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for't.'
My master, not myself, lacks recompense.
Enter OLIVIA and Priest
your lord's taking of this. Receive it so.
him. Close, in the name of jesting! Lie thou there,
obstruction in this: and the end,--what should
'Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with
I would exult, man: you know, he brought me out o'
Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a
of eating and drinking.
the church.
bed of Ware in England, set 'em down: go, about it.
That this may be some error, but no madness,
Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers
You mistake, sir, I am sure no man hath any quarrel
Madam, you have done me wrong,
Fie, that you'll say so! he plays o' the
No, not the duke's.
Misprision in the highest degree! Lady, cucullus non
I know I can do it.
others, to taste their valour: belike this is a man
hour: observe him, for the love of mockery, for I
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
Hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves:
Go, write it in a martial hand, be curst and brief,
That it alone is high fantastical.
the madman.
I shall pay dear.
[Aside]  Pray God defend me! A little thing would
[Within]  Who calls there?
things: I am not of your element: you shall know
Who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?
She'll none o' the count: she'll not match above
will is, it should be so returned: if it be worth
Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mind, one, two, three.
'There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, lady!'
By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for
In Orsino's bosom.
soft, soft!
When least in company. Prosper well in this,
Sir Topas!
we will draw the curtain and show you the picture.
I am slain by a fair cruel maid.
O, you give me ill counsel.
Possess us, possess us, tell us something of him.
So big, to hold so much, they lack retention
think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN
learned from my entertainment. What I am, and what I
Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over
Nay, I am for all waters.
That instant was I turn'd into a hart,
Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
How does he, sirrah?
more money.
Enter ANTONIO and SEBASTIAN
I'll give him reasons for't: hie thee, Malvolio.
What should I think on't?
To be Count Malvolio!
'Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.'
wrong side may be turned outward!
Pursue him and entreat him to a peace:
fencing, dancing and bear-baiting: O, had I but
Rough and unhospitable: my willing love,
Enter DUKE ORSINO, CURIO, and other Lords, Musicians attending
again. I go, sir, but I would not have you to think
Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my
turn you out of doors, never trust me.
Hold, Toby, on thy life I charge thee, hold!
Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan.
There is no woman's sides
Ay, ay: I care not for good life.
Is't so saucy?
With an invisible and subtle stealth
In the protection of his son, her brother,
To anger him we'll have the bear again, and we will
Of your complexion.
I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else: Thou
'Slight, I could so beat the rogue!
a beggar: Cressida was a beggar. My lady is
I beseech you, what manner of man is he?
Put up your sword. If this young gentleman
I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by
Well held out, i' faith! No, I do not know you, nor
The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother's
Which I have wonder'd at. In hope it shall not,
Enter SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO
Exeunt
Most of our city did: only myself stood out,
double-dealer: there's another.
Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for
What thinkest thou of his opinion?
This is the air, that is the glorious sun,
thou darest tempt me further, draw thy sword.
Confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands,
Sebastian are you?
Here comes my noble gull-catcher.
Why you have given me such clear lights of favour,
What's that to us? The time goes by: away!
that they come from my niece, and that she's in
Who was it?
It's dry, sir.
Exeunt
a Peg-a-Ramsey, and 'Three merry men be we.' Am not
make him believe thou art Sir Topas the curate: do
As doth that orbed continent the fire
In private brabble did we apprehend him.
saying was born, of 'I fear no colours.'
Fear not, Cesario, take thy fortunes up,
Exeunt
pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they
in standing water, between boy and man. He is very
Ay, or I'll cudgel him, and make him cry O!
Prithee, hold thy peace, this is not the way: do
brains. I will fetch you light and paper and ink.
I am no fee'd post, lady, keep your purse:
Methinks I feel this youth's perfections
The house will be the quieter.
A gentleman, and follower of my lady's.
SCENE II. OLIVIA's house.
with you for's oath sake: marry, he hath better
Re-enter OLIVIA, with VIOLA
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye,
Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times
He hath been most notoriously abused.
of 'we three'?
Exit
This is, to give a dog, and in recompense desire my
With eye-offending brine: all this to season
When that I was and a little tiny boy,
O, do not swear!
Exit
None can be call'd deform'd but the unkind:
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!
SONG.
will amend: for give the dry fool drink, then is
Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting,
O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?
comptible, even to the least sinister usage.
I pity you.
For so you shall be, while you are a man,
prithee, be gone.
Shall this fellow live?
Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.
To thee the book even of my secret soul:
CURIO and Attendants retire
Give ground, if you see him furious.
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow?
and sepulchre. Hob, nob, is his word, give't or take't.
souls out of one weaver? shall we do that?
deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
He started one poor heart of mine in thee.
There is a fair behavior in thee, captain,
Are empty trunks o'erflourish'd by the devil.
pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house,
'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's
thee, Malvolio?
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs. It
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep,
She did show favour to the youth in your sight only
They say, she hath abjured the company
what I am willing to keep in, therefore it charges
But, come what may, I do adore thee so,
Reveals before 'tis ripe, what thou dost know
He is not here, so please your lordship that should sing it.
by Sir Toby.
Orsino's mistress and his fancy's queen.
Good Mistress Mary Accost,--
would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.
Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
So long as I could see.
to the madman.
in't, and I would I were the first that ever
If you will not murder me for my love, let me be
I,--
Catch sung
Which you knew none of yours: what might you think?
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
Thou'rt a scholar, let us therefore eat and drink.
In favour was my brother, and he went
strangest mind i' the world, I delight in masques
of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on
O, it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound,
I think not so, my lord.
shent for speaking to you.
But more of that anon. Take him aside.
O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.
You'll find it otherwise, I assure you: therefore,
And since you call'd me master for so long,
Ay, husband: can he that deny?
And grew a twenty years removed thing
'If not, let me see thee a servant still.'
Adieu, good man devil.
Had number'd thirteen years.
Art thou a churchman?
She will not fail, for lovers break not hours,
I thank you gentle servant: 'tis very clerkly done.
Then you must undertake to slander him.
Sir Proteus, your father calls for you:
For I had rather wink than look on them.
Is she not hard-favoured, sir?
Even as one heat another heat expels,
Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and
As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a steeple!
That I, unworthy body as I am,
Without apparent hazard of his life.
I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.
Enter SILVIA, attended
'To Julia.' Say, from whom?
that cannot I help. Well, proceed.
Which I so lively acted with my tears
You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart:
Is she kind as she is fair?
But tell me, dost thou know my lady Silvia?
No more, unless the next word that thou speak'st
Who wouldst thou strike?
SONG.
Ay, and perversely she persevers so.
Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
You mistook, sir, I say, she did nod: and you ask
That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man,
By some sly trick blunt Thurio's dull proceeding.
How shall I dote on her with more advice,
Will give thee time to leave our royal court,
Why sir, how do you bear with me?
Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds
And I for such like petty crimes as these,
news, then, in your paper?
I now am full resolved to take a wife
Look, here is writ 'kind Julia.' Unkind Julia!
Ay: but, peace! let's hear 'em.
[Aside]        'Twere false, if I should speak it,
hath the worser sole. This shoe, with the hole in
What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio?
Pray heaven he prove so, when you come to him!
If this be he you oft have wish'd to hear from.
Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
Can no way change you to a milder form,
Cease to lament for that thou canst not help,
Though you respect not aught your servant doth,
Madam, 'twas Ariadne passioning
Neither regarding that she is my child
like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her, why, there
O illiterate loiterer! it was the son of thy
To hasten on his expedition.
I am thus early come to know what service
Inhabits in the finest wits of all.
A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears
Enter PANTHINO
Ay, but hearken, sir, though the chameleon Love can
True, sir, I was in love with my bed: I thank you,
testify your bounty, I thank you, you have testerned
Enter certain Outlaws
Exit
SCENE II. The same. Garden of JULIA's house.
Why, that word makes the faults gracious. Well,
So do counterfeits.
Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life.
Come, bring her away.
'tis, here's my mother's breath up and down. Now
Last night she enjoined me to write some lines to
[Aside]  But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
What ho! Lucetta!
And leave no memory of what it was!
Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!
so. Now come I to my father, Father, your blessing:
Master, be one of them, it's an honourable kind of thievery.
That thou art banished--O, that's the news!--
of all count.
It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.
To bear me company and go with me:
I must, where is no remedy.
I know you joy not in a love discourse.
To hear me speak the message I am sent on.
Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.
thy voyage, lose thy master, and, in losing thy
deceive it,
I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the wit to
carrying your letter.
And will employ thee in some service presently.
Enter SPEED and LAUNCE severally
Lady, a happy evening!
If ever danger do environ thee,
thou ever see me do such a trick?
And I mine.
for he, being in love, could not see to garter his
No, madam, so it stead you, I will write
Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.
Which, if my augury deceive me not,
By wailful sonnets, whose composed rhymes
O thou that dost inhabit in my breast,
That's not so, sir: we are your enemies.
And let them be recall'd from their exile:
Unless I prove false traitor to myself.
one she loves.
Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, adieu!
Regard thy danger, and along with me!
For they are harsh, untuneable and bad.
Exeunt
Yonder is Silvia, and Silvia's mine.
As of a knight well-spoken, neat and fine,
And will not use a woman lawlessly.
Are they not lamely writ?
Lest he should take exceptions to my love,
on you, I can hardly think you my master.
Where is Launce?
There is no day for me to look upon,
Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look,
SCENE II. Verona. JULIA'S house.
And at that time I made her weep agood,
Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed,
Then let her alone.
What dost thou know?
His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,
It were a shame to call her back again
I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine,
For I am sure she is not buried.
But, as thou lovest thy life, make speed from hence.
Then speak the truth by her, if not divine,
Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.
Saw you my daughter?
She dreams of him that has forgot her love,
Here is her oath for love, her honour's pawn.
This fellow were a king for our wild faction!
and I came no sooner into the dining-chamber but he
No, but she is an earthly paragon.
Where, if it please you, you may intercept him.
Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.
Of commendations sent from Valentine,
He would have given it you, but I, being in the way,
Sir Valentine!
More than quick words do move a woman's mind.
'Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.
But she loves you?
Forsworn my company and rail'd at me,
And he wants wit that wants resolved will
feed on the air, I am one that am nourished by my
gentlemanlike dogs under the duke's table: he had
That my discovery be not aimed at,
And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.
Return, return, and make thy love amends.
Dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet
The thicket is beset, he cannot 'scape.
Thou know'st how willingly I would effect
have when you chid at Sir Proteus for going
it will, if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.
By a letter, I should say.
that going will scarce serve the turn.
And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?
And this way comes he with it presently,
of her breath.'
The conclusion is then that it will.
To be seduced by thy flattery,
He plays false, father.
Except my mistress.
Where is that ring, boy?
In having known no travel in his youth.
Yes, yes, the lines are very quaintly writ,
And, being help'd, inhabits there.
Here is the cate-log of her condition.
Give me a note: your ladyship can set.
This love of theirs myself have often seen,
This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods,
Here is her picture: let me see, I think,
How now, sirrah?
I know him as myself, for from our infancy
Over the boots? nay, give me not the boots.
go to the ale with a Christian. Wilt thou go?
Therefore the office is indifferent,
A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
That stays to bear my letters to my friends,
Why, then, how stands the matter with them?
your lover.
Twenty to one then he is shipp'd already,
The tenor of them doth but signify
That no man hath access by day to her.
To hate young Valentine and love my friend.
I'll wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder.
Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.
Banished Valentine.
Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came,
Nay: in that you are astray, 'twere best pound you.
And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this kind,
'Tis pity love should be so contrary,
Provokes me to this threefold perjury,
urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a
Enter PROTEUS, SILVIA, and JULIA
And how do yours?
But well, when I discourse of love and peace?
and my staff understands me.
Farewell.
Exit
With falsehood, cowardice and poor descent,
And instances of infinite of love
Sirrah, I say, forbear. Friend Valentine, a word.
And, ere I part with thee, confer at large
O miserable, unhappy that I am!
Being destined to a drier death on shore.
Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.
But there I leave to love where I should love.
Would serve to scale another Hero's tower,
I curse myself, for they are sent by me,
'Item: She is too liberal.'
SCENE II. The same. The DUKE's palace.
Thus will I fold them one on another:
Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply,
She thanks you.
and, I think, no other treasure to give your
You must lay lime to tangle her desires
Are all these things perceived in me?
Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away
One that attends your ladyship's command.
The least whereof would quell a lover's hope,
Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out:
To love fair Silvia, shall I be forsworn,
shepherd for food follows not the sheep: thou for
That you may ruminate.
To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.
Which, being writ to me, shall be deliver'd
Some sixteen months, and longer might have stay'd,
But were you banish'd for so small a fault?
How! let me see:
As in revenge of thy ingratitude,
But here comes Thurio: now must we to her window,
wages. She hath more qualities than a water-spaniel,
Give him leave, madam, he is a kind of chameleon.
To plead for that which I would not obtain,
A slave, that still an end turns me to shame!
That's a deep story of a deeper love:
He is complete in feature and in mind
The mean is drown'd with your unruly bass.
By heaven! my wrath shall far exceed the love
If you respect them, best to take them up.
Why, I tell thee, I care not though he burn himself
And cannot soon revolt and change your mind.
Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,
Receiving them from such a worthless post.
One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,
Thou hast prevail'd, I pardon them and thee:
Verona shall not hold thee. Here she stands,
And entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart.
shepherd, but I seek my master, and my master seeks
And to the nightingale's complaining notes
stands well with her.
indeed, know not their fathers and therefore have no names.
So do you.
Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.
The blackest news that ever thou heardest.
Did hold his eyes lock'd in her crystal looks.
Ay, my good lord, a son that well deserves
Ay,
losing the flood, lose thy voyage, and, in losing
Come, Proteus, 'tis your penance but to hear
Your folly.
How likes she my discourse?
Sir Valentine her company and my court:
Nor I.
They are reformed, civil, full of good
Upon a homely object Love can wink.
Enter PROTEUS and JULIA
To sort some gentlemen well skill'd in music.
Nothing.
But count the world a stranger for thy sake.
Nay, take them.
That all our swains commend her?
And on a love-book pray for my success?
Your worship, sir, or else I mistook.
Your reason?
Ay, sir, and done too, for this time.
Where should I lose my tongue?
dog that lives: my mother weeping, my father
Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover,
ACT IV
take it for your pains.
How? out of tune on the strings?
I'll have her, and if it be a match, as nothing is
Come, shadow, come and take this shadow up,
This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
If her liquor be good, she shall: if she will not, I
Enter DUKE and THURIO
My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them:
O gentle Proteus, Love's a mighty lord,
Sir Thurio, fear not you: I will so plead
pray you, why is it?
And with the vantage of mine own excuse
Advise me where I may have such a ladder.
Upon the dull earth dwelling:
mastership?
How long hath she been deformed?
Himself would lodge where senseless they are lying!
Send her another, never give her o'er,
Nothing concerning me.
From whom?
service,--Why dost thou stop my mouth?
With Valentinus in the emperor's court:
If haply won, perhaps a hapless gain,
What seem I that I am not?
Your grace is welcome to a man disgraced,
the pestilence, to sigh, like a school-boy that had
That wait for execution in the morn.
O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman--
No, they are both as whole as a fish.
lose the tide, if you tarry any longer.
Exeunt
Besides, her intercession chafed him so,
And likewise will visit thee with mine.
How now, Signior Launce! what news with your
Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey
There shall he practise tilts and tournaments,
My duty pricks me on to utter that
have received my proportion, like the prodigious
one tear: he is a stone, a very pebble stone, and
So much they spur their expedition.
O, they love least that let men know their love.
Who? Silvia?
Since she respects my mistress' love so much.
SCENE II. Milan. Outside the DUKE's palace, under SILVIA's chamber.
Our youth got me to play the woman's part,
What, angry, Sir Thurio! do you change colour?
Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.
Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?
What, gone without a word?
What a fool is she, that knows I am a maid,
I'll keep shut: now, of another thing she may, and
This night intends to steal away your daughter:
What would your Grace have me to do in this?
team of horse shall not pluck that from me, nor who
If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
Thou thinkest not of this now. Nay, I remember the
What light is light, if Silvia be not seen?
Not a whit, when it jars so.
Who, in my mood, I stabb'd unto the heart.
And notwithstanding all her sudden quips,
Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.
To have a look of such a worthy mistress.
But, were I you, he never should be mine.
Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.
That they should harbour where their lord would be.'
No, girl, I'll knit it up in silken strings
Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleased.
I have one friend alive, thou wouldst disprove me.
Exit
Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me
With our discourse to make your grace to smile.
Yourself, sweet lady, for you gave the fire. Sir
If so, I pray thee, breathe it in mine ear,
Exit
Not of you.
Have learn'd me how to brook this patiently.
Time is the nurse and breeder of all good.
Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,
Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping,
That I had any light from thee of this.
Your own present folly and her passing deformity:
You must provide to bottom it on me,
Why, my pretty youth?
Would I not undergo for one calm look!
Attends the emperor in his royal court.
Now you have taken the pains to set it together,
O, 'tis a foul thing when a cur cannot keep himself
My substance should be statue in thy stead.
I tender 't here, I do as truly suffer
Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her, no,
Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow:
To make such means for her as thou hast done
SCENE IV. The same.
'Item: She hath a sweet mouth.'
Exit SPEED
For long agone I have forgot to court,
Experience is by industry achieved
Exeunt
Exit THURIO
Not like a woman, for I would prevent
SCENE I. Milan. The DUKE's palace.
For me and my possessions she esteems not.
Is turn'd to folly, blasting in the bud,
Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend.
O, flatter me, for love delights in praises.
But I will none of them, they are for you,
it loathes.
But cannot be true servant to my master,
Enter LAUNCE, leading a dog
court. I think Crab, my dog, be the sourest-natured
And fit for great employment, worthy lord.
Which, unreversed, stands in effectual force--
Look to the boy.
I fear my Julia would not deign my lines,
SCENE III. The frontiers of Mantua. The forest.
I have dined.
Descended into perjury, to love me.
[Aside]  That such an ass should owe them.
What means your ladyship? do you not like it?
Then let me go and hinder not my course
For Valentine myself, for Julia Silvia.
is more than the wit, for the greater hides the
On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates,
With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots.
O villain, that set this down among her vices! To
Julia I lose and Valentine I lose:
The loose encounters of lascivious men:
What says she to my valour?
Is he among these?
Exit
Enter VALENTINE and PROTEUS
Exeunt
However, but a folly bought with wit,
Silvia: did not I bid thee still mark me and do as I
Truly, sir, I think you'll hardly win her.
How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak?
Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths,
I know it well, sir, you have an exchequer of words,
mind. Give her no token but stones, for she's as
Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,
Thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain!
Were't not affection chains thy tender days
all the kind of the Launces have this very fault. I
So the remembrance of my former love
Because he loves her, he despiseth me,
No Valentine, indeed, for sacred Silvia.
But shall she marry him?
And duty never yet did want his meed:
Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off,
I never knew him otherwise.
Welcome, dear Proteus! Mistress, I beseech you,
How now, you whoreson peasant!
hose, and you, being in love, cannot see to put on your hose.
I tell thee, my master is become a hot lover.
How now! what letter are you reading there?
Sweet, except not any,
As if the garment had been made for me:
What instance of the contrary?
Away, I say! stay'st thou to vex me here?
To-morrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso,
Than plural faith which is too much by one:
You mistake, the musician likes me not.
one: 'What cur is that?' says another: 'Whip him
'Here follow her vices.'
To do what?
O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.
Please you, deliberate a day or two.
Hast thou observed that? even she, I mean.
To her let us garlands bring.
Who then? his spirit?
I fear I am attended by some spies.
Here if thou stay, thou canst not see thy love,
Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears
That Silvia is excelling,
[Aside]  If 'twere a substance, you would, sure,
no, no, this left shoe is my mother: nay, that
I think the boy hath grace in him, he blushes.
Whose high imperious thoughts have punish'd me
To help him of his blindness,
a maid, for she is her master's maid, and serves for
And, as we walk along, I dare be bold
Madam, I pity much your grievances,
Thus, for my duty's sake, I rather chose
I pray thee, Launce, an if thou seest my boy,
For being ignorant to whom it goes
And leave her on such slight conditions.
Whose life's as tender to me as my soul!
I'll get me such a colour'd periwig.
O, could their master come and go as lightly,
By thy approach thou makest me most unhappy.
Ay, by my beard, will we, for he's a proper man.
If you love her, you cannot see her.
Fills him with faults, makes him run through all the sins:
Not mine, my gloves are on.
In breaking faith with Julia whom I loved:
I'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end,
And make rough winter everlastingly.
Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not
So much of bad already hath possess'd them.
Now presently I'll give her father notice
Enter THURIO and Musicians
Doth Silvia know that I am banished?
No, no, you shall have it for bearing the letter.
And here he means to spend his time awhile:
Besides, she did intend confession
That I may compass yours.
Ay, that you shall.
For what I will, I will, and there an end.
Such as the fury of ungovern'd youth
Come not within the measure of my wrath,
With my master's ship? why, it is at sea.
speak puling, like a beggar at Hallowmas. You were
he hath killed, otherwise he had suffered for't.
Enter EGLAMOUR
Fie on thee, jolt-head! thou canst not read.
Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.
Say ay, and be the captain of us all:
Disdain to root the summer-swelling flower
My tales of love were wont to weary you,
Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
But since unwillingly, take them again.
Three things that women highly hold in hate.
Haply I do.
What said she? nothing?
'tis not a maid, for she hath had gossips, yet 'tis
Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
And presently all humbled kiss the rod!
What?
Yet hath Sir Proteus, for that's his name,
But I can make respective in myself,
Enter THURIO, PROTEUS, and JULIA
Pardon me, madam, I have unadvised
Tell us this: have you any thing to take to?
Thank me for this more than for all the favours
bolder to chide you for yours.
out' says the third: 'Hang him up' says the duke.
Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well
The love of Valentine and love Sir Thurio?
Since his exile she hath despised me most,
Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
What should it be that he respects in her
Hark, hark!
My ears are stopt and cannot hear good news,
wind were down, I could drive the boat with my sighs.
Or else a wit by folly vanquished.
Exit
Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplish'd:
do you, man? the music likes you not.
And writers say, as the most forward bud
Trenched in ice, which with an hour's heat
in all companies! I would have, as one should say,
I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady,
Gone to seek his dog, which tomorrow, by his
How esteemest thou me? I account of her beauty.
Let's see your song. How now, minion!
A smaller boon than this I cannot beg
'Tis true, for Friar Laurence met them both,
To be so anger'd with another letter.
And why not death rather than living torment?
Where you with Silvia may confer at large,
I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire,
To be fantastic may become a youth
It is no matter if the tied were lost, for it is the
I have no other, but a woman's reason,
Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care,
Witness good bringing up, fortune and truth:
Omitting the sweet benefit of time
But, being mask'd, he was not sure of it,
Tell me, Panthino, what sad talk was that
Enter Outlaws, with DUKE and THURIO
I fear me, it will make me scandalized.
Had come along with me, but that his mistress
as it were, a dog at all things. If I had not had
and spends what he borrows kindly in your company.
Know then, I here forget all former griefs,
If Proteus like your journey when you come,
Moist it again, and frame some feeling line
For thou hast shown some sign of good desert--
Than for the love of reckless Silvia.
I warrant you, my lord, more grace than boy.
I do desire thee, even from a heart
Come, come, a hand from either:
Come, answer not, but to it presently!
steps me to her trencher and steals her capon's leg:
Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker!
O, he sends you for a picture.
With nightly tears and daily heart-sore sighs,
Out at the postern by the abbey-wall:
Will well become such sweet-complaining grievance.
[Aside]  And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,
Why?
Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber,
Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus,
I throw thy name against the bruising stones,
'Item: She can wash and scour.'
For he was more than over shoes in love.
What dangerous action, stood it next to death,
But since thou lovest, love still and thrive therein,
What's here?
In what you please: I'll do what I can.
I left them all in health.
That I am desperate of obtaining her.
thee, out with't, and place it for her chief virtue.
He makes sweet music with the enamell'ed stones,
Sir, your glove.
But she is dead.
If you think so, then stay at home and go not.
I take your offer and will live with you,
Wherein I sigh not, Julia, for thy sake,
For such is a friend now, treacherous man!
My duty will I boast of, nothing else.
Pardon, dear madam: 'tis a passing shame
'Tis but her picture I have yet beheld,
Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.
Enter LAUNCE, with his his Dog
I'll die on him that says so but yourself.
Madam Silvia! Madam Silvia!
And I will help thee to prefer her too:
But by my coming I have made you happy.
Well, sir, this gentleman is come to me,
A woman sometimes scorns what best contents her.
Of thy success in love, and what news else
Foster'd, illumined, cherish'd, kept alive.
Have you the tongues?
Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.
Ursula, bring my picture here.
While other men, of slender reputation,
What is your news?
But constant, he were perfect. That one error
Unto a youthful gentleman of worth,
Now, as thou lovest me, do him not that wrong
Were full as lovely as is this of hers:
Now Valentine is banish'd from her sight.
Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserved her.
This ring I gave him when he parted from me,
But when I look on her perfections,
SCENE VII. Verona. JULIA'S house.
Poor wounded name! my bosom as a bed
I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find
Well, I will go.
look you, it goes hard: one that I brought up of a
A round hose, madam, now's not worth a pin,
Adieu, my Lord, Sir Valentine is coming.
Go with me. Once more, new servant, welcome:
Come on, Panthino: you shall be employ'd
At Saint Gregory's well.
For why, the fools are mad, if left alone.
Unto a ragged fearful-hanging rock
To let him spend his time no more at home,
And thence she cannot be convey'd away.
What's the unkindest tide?
Where shall I meet you?
That my master, being scribe, to himself should write
All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,
matter? why weepest thou, man? Away, ass! You'll
That longs for every thing that he can come by.
The water nectar and the rocks pure gold.
There, hold!
Why, she hath given you a letter.
And he that is so yoked by a fool,
in love. If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse,
A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.
Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall
Why, this it is to be a peevish girl,
Exeunt
Ah, Silvia, Silvia!
You take the sum and substance that I have.
unmannerly slave, that will thrust himself into
But for my duty to your ladyship.
To bind him to remember my good will,
Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
That I did love, for now my love is thaw'd,
Is by a newer object quite forgotten.
yourself? Why, do you not perceive the jest?
been executed, I have stood on the pillory for geese
His little speaking shows his love but small.
place till some certain shot be paid and the hostess
'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
That every day with parle encounter me,
Assure thyself my love is buried.
I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.
His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
Exit
And when the flight is made to one so dear,
That you shall say my cunning drift excels.
Ay, I would I were deaf, it makes me have a slow heart.
Could have persuaded me: now I dare not say
Go to thy lady's grave and call hers thence,
As one relying on your lordship's will
Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?
For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout,
Under the colour of commending him,
shalt have five thousand welcomes. But, sirrah, how
Marry, thus: when it stands well with him, it
Nor need'st thou much importune me to that
And I am going to deliver them.
And that letter hath she delivered, and there an end.
Done to me, undeserving as I am,
be ta'en from her.
What says she to my face?
How she opposes her against my will
Open your purse, that the money and the matter may
What lets but one may enter at her window?
Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness.
Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?
better man than thee.
Provided that you do no outrages
She says it is a fair one.
Come, go with us, we'll bring thee to our crews,
But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee,
I think your lordship is not ignorant
But, Valentine being gone, I'll quickly cross
Once more adieu! my father at the road
With bitter fasts, with penitential groans,
Enter PANTHINO
O, know'st thou not his looks are my soul's food?
Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave:
Run, boy, run, run, and seek him out.
And yet the painter flatter'd her a little,
Who by repentance is not satisfied
It's no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.
To praise his faith which I would have dispraised.
Who is that that spake?
son, and am going with Sir Proteus to the Imperial's
I know they are stuff'd with protestations
Who is Silvia? what is she,
If we recover that, we are sure enough.
I am sorry I must never trust thee more,
The heaven such grace did lend her,
walked, to walk like one of the lions, when you
Nor how my father would enforce me marry
Peace! we'll hear him.
Her true perfection, or my false transgression,
What say'st thou?
cannot be so neither: yes, it is so, it is so, it
Exeunt
What mean you by that saying?
Giving a ring
Bear witness, Heaven, I have my wish for ever.
impossible,--
Marry, by these special marks: first, you have
But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me
Here is a coil with protestation!
Enter PROTEUS and JULIA
If she do chide, 'tis not to have you gone,
And here is writ 'love-wounded Proteus.'
Thou friend of an ill fashion!
Well, give her that ring and therewithal
And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.
My health and happy being at your court.
I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.
Ha! let me see: ay, give it me, it's mine:
I'll after, more to be revenged on Eglamour
A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.
I do detest false perjured Proteus.
What says she to my birth?
O heaven! were man
Who respects friend?
And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!
By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.
She gave me none, except an angry word.
Visit by night your lady's chamber-window
the dog?' 'Ay, marry, do I,' quoth he. 'You do him
That fits as well as 'Tell me, good my lord,
By seven o'clock I'll get you such a ladder.
do? when didst thou see me heave up my leg and make
And so, good morrow, servant.
Than men their minds! 'tis true.
Reads
The picture that is hanging in your chamber,
And yet I would I had o'erlooked the letter:
She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.
I would it were,
Exit THURIO
Some to discover islands far away,
Silvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Thurio,
Or ne'er return again into my sight.
Ay, that she can.
'And more wealth than faults.'
Exit
She that your worship loves?
'Item: She can spin.'
Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.
For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight,
But if thou scorn our courtesy, thou diest.
At first I did adore a twinkling star,
Why, Valentine, what braggardism is this?
Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a parable.
Will you make haste?
To wrong him with thy importunacy?
He said that Proteus your son was meet,
thou, that my master is become a notable lover?
And nought esteems my aged eloquence:
Thou know'st, being stopp'd, impatiently doth rage,
Unless it have a false interpeter.
Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.
To take a note of what I stand in need of,
Lend me the letter, let me see what news.
And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face,
Besides, the fashion of the time is changed--
Madam, they are for you.
Here is my hand for my true constancy,
Thou must run to him, for thou hast stayed so long
Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love,
Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us,
Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.
I fear me, he will scarce be pleased withal.
Sebastian, I have entertained thee,
letters yourself: and so, sir, I'll commend you to my master.
She hath been fairer, madam, than she is:
But, host, doth this Sir Proteus that we talk on
Of their disguising and pretended flight,
Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistakest me.
Who should be trusted, when one's own right hand
If the ground be overcharged, you were best stick her.
Why then, a ladder quaintly made of cords,
What is't that you took up so gingerly?
the letter?
No.
Therefore I know she is about my height.
Not I.
I quote it in your jerkin.
[Aside]  True, from a gentleman to a fool.
Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them
And hath so humbled me, as, I confess,
How now, Sir Proteus! Is your countryman
Let's tune, and to it lustily awhile.
When she did think my master loved her well,
No believing you, indeed, sir. But did you perceive
looked sadly, it was for want of money: and now you
And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush!
What need a man care for a stock with a wench, when
I hold him but a fool that will endanger
Seem you that you are not?
Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.
wot of.' He makes me no more ado, but whips me out
Is gone with her along, and I must after,
Deliver'd you a paper that I should not:
Plotted and 'greed on for my happiness.
her earnest?
I am impatient of my tarriance.
Why muse you, sir? 'tis dinner-time.
If lost, why then a grievous labour won,
were so simple, none else would: but you are so
Enter ANTONIO and PANTHINO
That tide will stay me longer than I should.
That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear:
Fellows, stand fast, I see a passenger.
Win her with gifts, if she respect not words:
Enough, I read your fortune in your eye.
Him he knew well, and guess'd that it was she,
That which thyself hast now disclosed to me.
more wit than he, to take a fault upon me that he did,
Heavy! belike it hath some burden then?
Coy looks with heart-sore sighs, one fading moment's mirth
You never saw her since she was deformed.
With them, upon her knees, her humble self,
Only for his possessions are so huge,
Nay then, the wanton lies, my face is black.
Which they would have the profferer construe 'ay.'
Why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.
To her whose worth makes other worthies nothing,
What then?
Now, by the honour of my ancestry,
And make it but a shadow, as I am.
Swoons
O Valentine, this I endure for thee!
This proves me still a sheep.
'Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to
For love, thou know'st, is full of jealousy.
Enter VALENTINE and SPEED
Why he, of all the rest, hath never moved me.
Thus have I shunn'd the fire for fear of burning,
At Patrick's cell this even, and there she was not,
Why, Phaeton,--for thou art Merops' son,--
The uncertain glory of an April day,
With all the cunning manner of our flight,
And should she thus be stol'n away from you,
When she for thy repeal was suppliant,
Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto,
To see the wonders of the world abroad,
Good company, with them shall Proteus go:
I will forget that Julia is alive,
'Item: She hath many nameless virtues.'
back again.
Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine:
Except I be by Silvia in the night,
In conclusion, I stand affected to her.
My goods, my lands, my reputation,
now should I kiss my father, well, he weeps on. Now
O my dear Silvia! Hapless Valentine!
How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,
Soho, soho!
say 'Welcome!'
I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom:
What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus?
Sir Proteus, save you! Saw you my master?
That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,
Which else no worldly good should draw from me.
My master sues to her, and she hath
ACT I
She makes it strange, but she would be best pleased
man counts of her beauty.
'thus I would teach a dog.' I was sent to deliver
That you will wonder what hath fortuned.
Or else return no more into my sight.
and I a sheep?
And made them watchers of mine own heart's sorrow.
Exeunt PROTEUS and SILVIA severally
Go give your master this: tell him from me,
Ay, sir: the other squirrel was stolen from me by
When inward joy enforced my heart to smile!
Put forth their sons to seek preferment out:
And on the justice of my flying hence,
She shall not long continue love to him.
make your wit bankrupt.
Exit
Plead a new state in thy unrivall'd merit,
And there I'll rest, as after much turmoil
Exeunt
The more degenerate and base art thou,
And how stand you affected to his wish?
And make a pastime of each weary step,
Go thou with her to the west end of the wood,
What compass will you wear your farthingale?'
'Tis indeed, madam, we thank the giver.
So I believe, but Thurio thinks not so.
I was, and held me glad of such a doom.
Leave not the mansion so long tenantless,
Come, fool, come, try me in thy paper.
Why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.
Enter SILVIA, VALENTINE, THURIO, and SPEED
Deliver'd by a friend that came from him.
Exeunt ANTONIO and PANTHINO
Wept bitterly, and would I might be dead
To cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks,
Take no repulse, whatever she doth say,
What halloing and what stir is this to-day?
But, fly I hence, I fly away from life.
I better brook than flourishing peopled towns:
What say you to a letter from your friends
Like exhibition thou shalt have from me.
All these are servants to deceitful men.
And thereof comes the proverb: 'Blessing of your
Why, then, I would resort to her by night.
Go presently and take this ring with thee,
With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights:
As seek to quench the fire of love with words.
For since the substance of your perfect self
Ay, ay, and she hath offer'd to the doom--
Thou liest, I can.
currish thanks is good enough for such a present.
Where your good word cannot advantage him,
that they live by your bare words.
Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall
I thank you, madam, that you tender her.
Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss
Upon mine honour, he shall never know
if not, thou art an Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the
Of much good news?
Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car
To bear my lady's train, lest the base earth
I do, my lord.
Neither.
From a pound to a pin? fold it over and over,
I kill'd a man, whose death I much repent,
Why then, we'll make exchange, here, take you this.
Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus?
Now, tell me, Proteus, what's your will with me?
O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible,
And yet a thousand times it answers 'no.'
They are all perceived without ye.
But in what habit will you go along?
I will dispatch him to the emperor's court.
Exeunt
Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch,
Nor to his service no such joy on earth.
The story of your loves discovered:
So, by your circumstance, I fear you'll prove.
I have taught him, even as one would say precisely,
When thou dost meet good hap, and in thy danger,
Exeunt
Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.
Unless it be to think that she is by
Wise.
Exeunt severally
Is eaten by the canker ere it blow,
now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping:
The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks
A silly answer and fitting well a sheep.
O, Heaven be judge how I love Valentine,
A little time will melt her frozen thoughts
By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar,
I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.
Longer than swiftest expedition
And think my patience, more than thy desert,
Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.
carry, therefore is she better than a jade. 'Item:
And how he cannot be a perfect man,
How could he see his way to seek out you?
'Tis true, for you are over boots in love,
We have some secrets to confer about.
That she is not so fair as, of you, well-favoured.
I rather would entreat thy company
He being her pupil, to become her tutor.
A pretty period! Well, I guess the sequel,
Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!
or your own eyes had the lights they were wont to
the more wrong,' quoth I, ''twas I did the thing you
Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,
Exit VALENTINE
Come, I'll convey thee through the city-gate,
Till I have found each letter in the letter,
And Silvia is myself: banish'd from her
For any or for all these exercises,
Know, then, that some of us are gentlemen,
And I must minister the like to you.
Is she not passing fair?
staff understands me.
'Item: She can knit.'
Enter DUKE
Have done, have done, here comes the gentleman.
Well of his wealth, but of himself, so so.
Some to the studious universities.
but the word 'noddy' for my pains.
master, lose thy service, and, in losing thy
Dinner is ready, and your father stays.
That hath more mind to feed on your blood than live
Because Love is blind. O, that you had mine eyes,
Beshrew me, but you have a quick wit.
Is privilege for thy departure hence:
And now it is about the very hour
see her beautiful.
My lord, I will be thankful.
Valentine's page, and sent, I think, from Proteus.
unkindest tied that ever any man tied.
with clean hands.
marriage-hour,
'Item: She doth talk in her sleep.'
Expects my coming, there to see me shipp'd.
That's on some shallow story of deep love:
In love
What, that my leg is too long?
Exeunt SILVIA and THURIO
Bid him make haste and meet me at the North-gate.
[Reads]  'Imprimis: She can milk.'
Unto the secret nameless friend of yours,
When Proteus cannot love where he's beloved.
Love thee as our commander and our king.
O, ay, and pities them.
And also, I think, thou art not ignorant
Confirm his welcome with some special favour.
the hangman boys in the market-place: and then I
This evening coming.
Then know that I have little wealth to lose:
Exeunt
And not upon your maid.
Sir Proteus, as I take it.
Go get you gone, and let the papers lie:
Dumb jewels often in their silent kind
I, having been acquainted with the smell before,
Please you, I'll write your ladyship another.
That to close prison he commanded her,
Look, what thou want'st shall be sent after thee:
In thy tale.
Welcome him then according to his worth.
I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake,
His body for a girl that loves him not:
That hast deceived so many with thy vows?
Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates,
Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late?
O good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ring
Unless it be to come before their time,
Enter SILVIA
Ay, my good lord.
O, I have fed upon this woe already,
am the dog: no, the dog is himself, and I am the
in your air.
O, sir, I find her milder than she was,
Here's too small a pasture for such store of muttons.
But pity her.
I cannot now prove constant to myself,
That I may venture to depart alone.
Upon the very naked name of love.
Ay, madam.
I see you have a month's mind to them.
Where is the gentleman that was with her?
SCENE IV. Another part of the forest.
If you be she, I do entreat your patience
No, not so much as 'Take this for thy pains.' To
Now, my young guest, methinks you're allycholly: I
And daily graced by the emperor,
Why, then will I tell thee--that thy master stays
With all good grace to grace a gentleman.
This night he meaneth with a corded ladder
Indeed, madam, I seem so.
She is not within hearing, sir.
Because methinks that she loved you as well
'Imprimis: She can fetch and carry.' Why, a horse
Ay, boy, it's for love.
Love hath chased sleep from my enthralled eyes
Than how?
Forgive me, Valentine: if hearty sorrow
My father stays my coming, answer not,
Pulling out a paper
This very night, for Love is like a child,
Only deserve my love by loving him,
Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly, having nothing
Have patience, gentle Julia.
I know it well, my Lord, and, sure, the match
For me?
And I have play'd the sheep in losing him.
Some to the wars, to try their fortune there,
Haply when they have judged me fast asleep,
Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.
Then let it lie for those that it concerns.
And afterward determine our proceedings.
A notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.
Exeunt THURIO and Musicians
His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.
Now, tell me, how do all from whence you came?
Enter JULlA and LUCETTA
stocks for puddings he hath stolen, otherwise he had
Sir, call me what thou darest.
At Friar Patrick's cell,
Whither travel you?
How use doth breed a habit in a man!
'Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.
Well, your old vice still, mistake the word. What
By penitence the Eternal's wrath's appeased:
A prize, a prize, a prize!
Now will he interpret to her.
All happiness bechance to thee in Milan!
Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.
live, he had suffered for't, you shall judge. He
Are visibly character'd and engraved,
Losing his verdure even in the prime
Poor gentlewoman! my master wrongs her much.
O, 'tis the curse in love, and still approved,
Then tell me, whither were I best to send him?
Some necessaries that I needs must use,
victuals, and would fain have meat. O, be not like
Myself was from Verona banished
She is fair, and so is Julia that I love--
What, didst thou offer her this from me?
not me: therefore I am no sheep.
Why, man, how black?
of the chamber. How many masters would do this for
That will be music.
How now! are you sadder than you were before? How
You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
When possibly I can, I will return.
[Aside]  O, give ye good even! here's a million of manners.
You have prevail'd, my lord, if I can do it
Where have you been these two days loitering?
Sir, we are undone, these are the villains
I have done penance for contemning Love,
How his companion, youthful Valentine,
Why didst not tell me sooner? pox of your love letters!
Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it!
How he her chamber-window will ascend
And oftentimes have purposed to forbid
I was.
O excellent device! was there ever heard a better,
Ay, Silvia, for your sake.
Dare you presume to harbour wanton lines?
I thank you for your own. Now, gentlemen,
I would you were set, so your affection would cease.
Whom I affect, but she is nice and coy
That no man hath recourse to her by night.
And now I must be as unjust to Thurio.
To Verona.
Rehearse that once more.
How many women would do such a message?
The time now serves not to expostulate:
And Eglamour is in her company.
Holy, fair and wise is she,
That's as much as to say, bastard virtues, that,
Alas! this parting strikes poor lovers dumb.
And built so shelving that one cannot climb it
The sun begins to gild the western sky,
For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lovest her.
I gave this unto Julia.
No, Valentine.
Not being tried and tutor'd in the world:
Farewell.
Now, daughter Silvia, you are hard beset.
Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.
You, minion, are too saucy.
and being so hard to me that brought your mind, I
But, good my Lord, do it so cunningly
I must unto the road, to disembark
Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?
I cannot reach so high.
It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,
I am resolved that thou shalt spend some time
be both at once delivered.
And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.
And, for your friend's sake, will be glad of you,
Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly
As much I wish all good befortune you.
That she might admired be.
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart,
Even as I would when I to love begin.
Come, come,
Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken
Did in your name receive it: pardon the
Madam, it will not lie where it concerns
Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
Yet he, of all the rest, I think, best loves ye.
She that you gaze on so as she sits at supper?
Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,
But chiefly for thy face and thy behavior,
These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence.
Marry, after they closed in earnest, they parted very
And must I go to him?
This letter. That's her chamber. Tell my lady
Considers she my possessions?
Thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, loved and adored!
A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary
That used me so, or else, by Jove I vow,
Who calls?
Survives, to whom, thyself art witness,
O, how this spring of love resembleth
There is no news, my lord, but that he writes
Sad sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears,
For thee! ay, who art thou? he hath stayed for a
Since maids, in modesty, say 'no' to that
To learn his wit to exchange the bad for better.
That now she is become as black as I.
Enter, at a distance, Host, and JULIA in boy's clothes
But she I mean is promised by her friends
'Item: She is not to be kissed fasting in respect
Let me read them.
'Twere good you knocked him.
And yet I will not, sith so prettily
heart, you brew good ale.'
On silly women or poor passengers.
What should I see then?
To leave my Julia, shall I be forsworn,
O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinned,
Repair me with thy presence, Silvia,
Much less shall she that hath Love's wings to fly,
Torment me for my love's forgetfulness!
But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,
I will send him hither to you presently.
I thank your grace, the gift hath made me happy.
She is dead, belike?
Well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast. Read on.
This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.
Marry, sir, so painted, to make her fair, that no
For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.
And I was trimm'd in Madam Julia's gown,
Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love,
Come, come away, man, I was sent to call thee.
Dost thou know her?
Go, sirrah, find him out. Come, Valentine.
And so by many winding nooks he strays
Be gone! I will not hear thy vain excuse,
I tell you what Launce, his man, told me: he loved
Exit
Better forbear till Proteus make return.
If not, to compass her I'll use my skill.
No, that it is too little.
Go, I come, I come.
For I did play a lamentable part:
Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you, be my mean
Withdraw thee, Valentine: who's this comes here?
Alas, how love can trifle with itself!
Madam, this service I have done for you,
will not tell myself, and yet 'tis a milkmaid, yet
ACT III
[Aside]  And yet you will, and yet another 'yet.'
Without some treachery used to Valentine.
Is full of virtue, bounty, worth and qualities
You know him well?
Enter JULIA and LUCETTA
And I will follow, more for Silvia's love
If there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.
Not so, I think she lives.
her out of all nick.
SCENE IV. Milan. The DUKE's palace.
How and which way I may bestow myself
You do not?
Tarry I here, I but attend on death:
Enter Outlaws with SILVIA
Are journeying to salute the emperor
To the sweet glances of thy honour'd love,
Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.
Enter PROTEUS
I would it were no worse.
Those at her father's churlish feet she tender'd,
Then thus: of many good I think him best.
Belike that now she hath enfranchised them
Which cannot perish having thee aboard,
And I from Mantua, for a gentleman,
But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
Which must be done by praising me as much
Him we go to find: there's not a hair on's head
What would you with her, if that I be she?
To whom?
Exit
From hence, from Silvia and from me thy friend.
The best way is to slander Valentine
I would have been a breakfast to the beast,
Love is your master, for he masters you:
Send to me in the morning and I'll send it:
And is that paper nothing?
How now! what means this passion at his name?
Lord, Lord! to see what folly reigns in us!
Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen.
The key whereof myself have ever kept,
To die is to be banish'd from myself,
Except thou wilt except against my love.
Your slander never can endamage him,
She excels each mortal thing
Thou art not ignorant what dear good will
wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat
My riches are these poor habiliments,
Enter PROTEUS
Now no discourse, except it be of love,
And presently go with me to my chamber,
I will try thee. Tell me this: who begot thee?
This discipline shows thou hast been in love.
Why, if it please you, take it for your labour:
She is my essence, and I leave to be,
Why, sir, I know her not.
fear she'll prove as hard to you in telling your
Of her tongue she cannot, for that's writ down she
Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend,
Sweet love! sweet lines! sweet life!
Because I love him I must pity him.
Enter SILVIA
Marry, at my house. Trust me, I think 'tis almost
And by and by a cloud takes all away!
[Aside]  'Tis true, such pearls as put out
here she comes.
No more, gentlemen, no more:--here comes my father.
Unless I flatter with myself too much.
Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken,
When a man's servant shall play the cur with him,
A thousand more mischances than this one
Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.
wages followest thy master, thy master for wages
From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
Out, out, Lucetta! that would be ill-favour'd.
And that set together is noddy.
Why, ne'er repent it, if it were done so.
As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift!
the dog all this while sheds not a tear nor speaks a
How shall I best convey the ladder thither?
'Tis an ill office for a gentleman,
And be in eye of every exercise
SCENE VI. The same. The DUKE'S palace.
There is no woe to his correction,
Such an immodest raiment, if shame live
O, that our fathers would applaud our loves,
did thy master part with Madam Julia?
O me unhappy!
'Item: She will often praise her liquor.'
That you are worthless.
Music plays
I will not fail your ladyship. Good morrow, gentle lady.
And that's far worse than none, better have none
SCENE II. The same. The DUKE's palace.
I should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes
Do curse the grace that with such grace hath bless'd them,
And all the fair effects of future hopes.
But when his fair course is not hindered,
When will you go?
At thy service.
not been there--bless the mark!--a pissing while, but
I hope my master's suit will be but cold,
Fie, fie, unreverend tongue! to call her bad,
Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphosed me,
'Tis well that I get it so. But, Launce, how sayest
Recking as little what betideth me
Nay, I was rhyming: 'tis you that have the reason.
My lord, I cannot be so soon provided:
follows not thee: therefore thou art a sheep.
For what offence?
For 'tis thy rival. O thou senseless form,
As many, worthy lady, to yourself:
Enter PROTEUS
Indeed, because you are a banish'd man,
To take a paper up that I let fall.
All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.
What fashion, madam shall I make your breeches?
That makes amends for her sour breath.
For 'get you gone,' she doth not mean 'away!'
Love doth to her eyes repair,
Why dost thou cry 'alas'?
My friends,--
But say this weed her love from Valentine,
O, but I love his lady too too much,
I leave myself, my friends and all, for love.
Ay, and we are betroth'd: nay, more, our,
Nor fearing me as if I were her father,
Say, say, who gave it thee?
This is the letter to your ladyship.
And thinking of it makes me cry 'alas!'
They love me well, yet I have much to do
As ending anthem of my endless dolour.
And then I'll presently attend you.
All men but Proteus.
taught her suitor,
Or else I often had been miserable.
perplexity, yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed
That makes me reasonless to reason thus?
Ask my dog: if he say ay, it will! if he say no,
Enter DUKE
I will not flatter her.
Which I was much unwilling to proceed in
When to her beauty I commend my vows,
To which I thus subscribe: Sir Valentine,
Have you long sojourned there?
Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones,
Nothing but my fortune.
What joy is joy, if Silvia be not by?
Then I am paid,
Whereon this month I have been hammering.
With other gentlemen of good esteem,
presently, where, for one shot of five pence, thou
But what said she?
Upon the rising of the mountain-foot
Here, youth, there is my purse, I give thee this
To any happy messenger from thence.
all one, if he be but one knave. He lives not now
For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
I know it well, sir, you always end ere you begin.
Therefore know thou, for this I entertain thee.
To keep me from a most unholy match,
That presently you hie you home to bed.
And, in good time! now will we break with him.
No, believe me.
'Tis love you cavil at: I am not Love.
And, that my love may appear plain and free,
So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
Let me be blest to make this happy close,
A journey to my loving Proteus.
Had I been seized by a hungry lion,
Ay, that change is the spite.
Close at the heels of her virtues.
Have some unhappy passenger in chase.
There is a lady in Verona here
less. What's next?
Than hate for Silvia that is gone for love.
To yourself: why, she wooes you by a figure.
To that I'll speak, to that I'll sigh and weep:
A pack of sorrows which would press you down,
To hazard life and rescue you from him
Take but possession of her with a touch:
Is self from self: a deadly banishment!
As little by such toys as may be possible.
I do.
Ay, but the doors be lock'd and keys kept safe,
He couples it to his complaining names.
Bears no impression of the thing it was.
And not without desert so well reputed.
Even now about it! I will pardon you.
But pearls are fair, and the old saying is,
As we do in our quality much want--
Wherefore?
To give the onset to thy good advice.
My jerkin is a doublet.
Go to, sir: tell me, do you know Madam Silvia?
Not so, sweet  lady: but too mean a servant
Pity the dearth that I have pined in,
Tune my distresses and record my woes.
Pardon me, Proteus: all I can is nothing
And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,
Love bade me swear and Love bids me forswear.
That you are welcome?
You would be fingering them, to anger me.
Enter VALENTINE
Go, base intruder! overweening slave!
If you turn not, you will return the sooner.
But Moyses and Valerius follow him.
Yet let her be a principality,
I'll leave you to confer of home affairs,
Often resort unto this gentlewoman?
Say that she be, yet Valentine thy friend
What letter is this same? What's here? 'To Silvia'!
Then to Silvia let us sing,
'Silvia, this night I will enfranchise thee.'
it, is my mother, and this my father, a vengeance
Are you content to be our general?
Shall lodge thee till thy wound be thoroughly heal'd,
And so suppose am I, for in his grave
Nay, then he should be blind, and, being blind
I will not look upon your master's lines:
I to myself am dearer than a friend,
Why, how know you that I am in love?
That's as much as to say, Can she so?
Hath he excepted most against my love.
Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift,
Exeunt
I mean that her beauty is exquisite, but her favour infinite.
O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook:
How! Julia!
[Aside]  He should give her interest and she gives it him.
His Julia gave it him at his departure.
Now therefore would I have thee to my tutor--
Nay, would I were so anger'd with the same!
ungartered!
Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?
And, in a word, for far behind his worth
It stands under thee, indeed.
Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her,
Do not name Silvia thine, if once again,
Thurio borrows his wit from your ladyship's looks,
And that I love him not as I was wont.
It may not be, good madam, pardon me.
My daughter takes his going grievously.
Enter SILVIA above
Almost as well as I do know myself:
ACT V
and thou art to post after with oars. What's the
And show thee all the treasure we have got,
You have a quick ear.
A rashness that I ever yet have shunn'd,
She can milk,' look you, a sweet virtue in a maid
Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.
Leave off discourse of disability:
Hath she forsworn me?
That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit,
Exit
Who, all enraged, will banish Valentine,
fasted, it was presently after dinner, when you
me, in requital whereof, henceforth carry your
And even in kind love I do conjure thee,
thrusts me himself into the company of three or four
one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed, to be,
When would you use it? pray, sir, tell me that.
I give consent to go along with you,
Upon this warrant shall you have access
Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.
water against a gentlewoman's farthingale? didst
[Aside]  But love will not be spurr'd to what
But since your falsehood shall become you well
But you, Sir Thurio, are not sharp enough,
No, boy, but as well as I can do them. Peace!
And slaves they are to me that send them flying:
Go, go, be gone, to save your ship from wreck,
you swinged me for my love, which makes me the
I am to break with thee of some affairs
I think verily he had been hanged for't, sure as I
This is the hour that Madam Silvia
As e'er I did commit.
Be patient, we must bring you to our captain.
And yet take this again, and yet I thank you,
By ought that I can speak in his dispraise,
Exit
Go get thee hence, and find my dog again,
But now he parted hence, to embark for Milan.
Madam, if your heart be so obdurate,
As much to you at home! and so, farewell.
The eating canker dwells, so eating love
And think thee worthy of an empress' love:
But shall I hear him speak?
The current that with gentle murmur glides,
Servant!
An heir, and near allied unto the duke.
Whence came you?
Re-enter LUCETTA
No matter who's displeased when you are gone:
Especially against his very friend.
But Valentine, if he be ta'en, must die.
Peace, villain!
To the sweet Julia:' that I'll tear away.
Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
'Item: She hath more hair than wit, and more faults
To climb celestial Silvia's chamber-window,
And pray her to a fault for which I chid her.
Longer than I prove loyal to your grace
hard as steel.
Go on before, I shall inquire you forth:
Well, let us go.
What maintenance he from his friends receives,
By my halidom, I was fast asleep.
Launce, away, away, aboard! thy master is shipped
Out with that too, it was Eve's legacy, and cannot
Enter PROTEUS
As thou lovest Silvia, though not for thyself,
your mistress, be moved, be moved.
Here can I sit alone, unseen of any,
wringing her hands, and all our house in a great
To Milan let me hear from thee by letters
That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret.
Upon whose faith and honour I repose.
Fear not, he bears an honourable mind,
'Item: She can sew.'
than hairs, and more wealth than faults.'
Enter PROTEUS and LAUNCE
That's the letter I writ to her friend.
He is in haste, therefore, I pray you to go.
all the chamber smelt him. 'Out with the dog!' says
To whisper and conspire against my youth?
That e'er I watch'd and the most heaviest.
cover of the salt hides the salt, and therefore it
To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode,
Say that upon the altar of her beauty
she can knit him a stock?
Alas, the way is wearisome and long!
Alas!
And perfected by the swift course of time.
Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope.
'Item: She hath more hair than wit,'--
Who is that, servant?
'tis I love, and yet 'tis a woman, but what woman, I
More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye?
Didst thou but know the inly touch of love,
There is our captain: we'll follow him that's fled,
SCENE V. The same. A street.
Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for
What might we do to make the girl forget
If I can cheque my erring love, I will,
Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can
As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine.
Tears the letter
What seest thou?
Forgive them what they have committed here
Being unprevented, to your timeless grave.
For beauty lives with kindness.
To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn,
Lucetta, as thou lovest me, let me have
name of a Christian.
And if it please you, so, if not, why, so.
heart-strings.
We'll have him. Sirs, a word.
A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful
That you might kill your stomach on your meat
She's fled unto that peasant Valentine,
Nay, that I will not.
For I will be thy beadsman, Valentine.
Forgive me that I do not dream on thee,
I ever bore my daughter or thyself.
learned, like Sir Proteus, to wreathe your arms,
What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.
A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears:
We'll both attend upon your ladyship.
These banish'd men that I have kept withal
That art a votary to fond desire?
diet, to watch like one that fears robbing, to
Thou subtle, perjured, false, disloyal man!
My foolish rival, that her father likes
I nightly lodge her in an upper tower,
Than, living dully sluggardized at home,
Exit
Here comes the duke.
Enter VALENTINE and SPEED
It would be much vexation to your age.
If not: we'll make you sit and rifle you.
Till the last step have brought me to my love,
come I to my sister, mark the moan she makes. Now
Such another proof will make me cry 'baa.'
Re-enter PANTHINO
No Valentine, if Silvia have forsworn me.
I have a sonnet that will serve the turn
Even with the speediest expedition
They do not love that do not show their love.
As he in penance wander'd through the forest,
Have some malignant power upon my life:
What thou sayest?
For in revenge of my contempt of love,
[Aside]  He heard not that.
She, in my judgment, was as fair as you:
Alas, poor fool! why do I pity him
welcome. I reckon this always, that a man is never
What's your will?
To keep them from uncivil outrages.
Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,
And with a corded ladder fetch her down,
And with thy daring folly burn the world?
[Aside]  How like a dream is this I see and hear!
But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,
His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
More hair than wit? It may be, I'll prove it. The
Tune a deploring dump: the night's dead silence
Determined of, how I must climb her window,
Not for the world: why, man, she is mine own,
But qualify the fire's extreme rage,
[Aside]  O excellent motion! O exceeding puppet!
Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance.
Come come, open the matter in brief: what said she?
Exit
Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.
Wilt thou go?
Nothing.
If this fond Love were not a blinded god?
I wait upon his pleasure. Come, Sir Thurio,
Into a thousand oaths, and all those oaths
For love is still most precious in itself,
How angerly I taught my brow to frown,
Forbear, forbear, I say! it is my lord the duke.
Which to requite, command me while I live.
Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.
a laced mutton, and she, a laced mutton, gave me, a
As if but now they waxed pale for woe:
And to commend their service to his will.
Therefore, as you unwind her love from him,
I'll force thee yield to my desire.
ACT II
And you an officer fit for the place.
That all the travellers do fear so much.
Why didst thou stoop, then?
Now will he be swinged for reading my letter, an
To lesson me and tell me some good mean
And, that thou mayst perceive my fear of this,
I am very loath to be your idol, sir,
SCENE I. Verona. An open place.
Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will love you,
In a disguise of love:
For I have heard him say a thousand times
Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.
Unless I look on Silvia in the day,
Bu t yet I slew him manfully in fight,
A linguist and a man of such perfection
Even so by love the young and tender wit
And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers,
Madam, madam!
How tall was she?
Your servant and your friend,
sister, for, look you, she is as white as a lily and
which is much in a bare Christian.
That leads towards Mantua, whither they are fled:
Thrust from the company of awful men:
But fearing lest my jealous aim might err
Without false vantage or base treachery.
A blessed soul doth in Elysium.
Now, trust me, 'tis an office of great worth
My penance is to call Lucetta back
Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
No more of stay! to-morrow thou must go.
The tide is now: nay, not thy tide of tears,
To cross my friend in his intended drift
It seems you loved not her, to leave her token.
And I as rich in having such a jewel
but 'tis a Valentine.
And so unworthily disgrace the man,
Nay then, no matter, stay with me awhile,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.
That they may hold excus'd our lawless lives,
wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock, when you
Thou common friend, that's without faith or love,
You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
An if the shepherd be a while away.
Some rare note-worthy object in thy travel:
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
Where meet we?
Methinks, should not be chronicled for wise.
Enter VALENTINE
You conclude that my master is a shepherd, then,
Why, couldst thou perceive so much from her?
Then never dream on infamy, but go.
I have.
Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.
No, Valentine.
In thy tail!
wept to have seen our parting, why, my grandam,
Already have I been false to Valentine
That flies her fortune when it follows her.
Thou hast beguiled my hopes, nought but mine eye
Mistress, it is: sweet lady, entertain him
Belike, boy, then, you are in love, for last
And threw her sun-expelling mask away,
And, where I thought the remnant of mine age
Gone, my good lord.
for thee at the North-gate.
And study help for that which thou lament'st.
to Madam Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.
My gracious lord, that which I would discover
Let me not live to look upon your grace.
Valentine?
What then?
As meet to be an emperor's counsellor.
I'll get me one of such another length.
Madam,
I'll warrant you, 'tis as well:
If I be not by her fair influence
Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
He is as worthy for an empress' love
Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
Where you may temper her by your persuasion
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year,
Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
Which he not dreams of.
Turn all to the best! These proclamations,
Ay, my good lord.
We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
And only that I stand for. I appeal
That I may call thee something more than man
No remedy, but you will,--give me the office
What means Sicilia?
If the springe hold, the cock's mine.
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare
The one I have almost forgot,--your pardon,--
Let be, let be.
Sorely, to say I did, it is as bitter
The crown will find an heir: great Alexander
A ram, and bleated, and the fire-robed god,
Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
burthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads and
I have: but what of him?
At knowing of thy choice.
To you a charge and trouble: to save both,
My good Camillo,
the princess my sister called my father father, and
wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a
As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes
There's magic in thy majesty, which has
I'll hear you by and by.
sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em, now the
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up,
Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!
Good my lord,--
No longer stay.
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
A man, the worst about you.
Apollo, pardon
say if the importance were joy or sorrow, but in the
not, man, here's no harm intended to thee.
The sternness of his presence?
Adieu, sir.
it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the
They talk aside
with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign
Nay, come, sit down, then on.
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Merry or sad shall't be?
sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he
and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the
As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless
My lord,
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
Like an old tale: but it appears she lives,
Exit with DORCAS and MOPSA
O, then my best blood turn
We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?
One of these is true:
From your good queen.
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk
I am but sorry, not afeard, delay'd,
For thou set'st on thy wife.
And do not call them bastards.
Ay, my lord: and fear
How! gone!
Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,
Affront his eye.
But with her most vile principal, that she's
me.
With thoughts so qualified as your charities
than the master: if any where I have them, 'tis by
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come
Above a better gone, so must thy grave
As now they are, and making practised smiles,
To the contrary I have express commandment.
With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
For every inch of woman in the world,
But few,
Nor was not to be equall'd,'--thus your verse
If never, yet that Time himself doth say
A servant grafted in my serious trust
His princess, say you, with him?
We must be neat, not neat, but cleanly, captain:
Exeunt PAULINA and Ladies, with HERMIONE
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled, the
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
Than you can put us to't.
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:
Enter CAMILLO and ARCHIDAMUS
Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
A lady like me, with a love even such,
Press me not, beseech you, so.
Lay it by too: another.
O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,
Might thus have stood begetting wonder as
Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month
knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
If it be so,
That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
sheep-shearing.
Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing,
Is this the daughter of a king?
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer,
from court and is less frequent to his princely
will what have we here! Mercy on 's, a barne a very
Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour
Thy penitent reform'd: but we have been
was senseless, 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a
Prove as successful to the queen,--O be't so!--
I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound
Sir, that's to-morrow.
I think so. Kill'd!
She is i' the rear our birth.
Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
Enter a Shepherd
My bosom likes not, nor my brows! Mamillius,
do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it,
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,
How now, rustics! whither are you bound?
Of your fresh princess, o'er and o'er divides him
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunn'd,
Become your time of day, and yours, and yours,
it should take joy
has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,
Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our
He neither does nor shall.
Then my account I well may, give,
though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and
And, madam,
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's nose
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
I am barr'd, like one infectious. My third comfort
A most intelligencing bawd!
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another,
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it,
Apollo's angry, and the heavens themselves
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
What maids lack from head to heel:
how it takes up the shore! but that's not the
Without her love, for her employ them all,
ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was
which is called true is so like an old tale, that
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
I lodge my wife, I'll go in couples with her,
homely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Doth set my pugging tooth on edge,
Something unfilial: reason my son
boy, the next way home.
Enter POLIXENES and CAMILLO
Will you swear
For more amazement. If you can behold it,
SCENE I:
Aside, aside, here is more matter for a hot brain:
Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
To FLORIZEL
Although the print be little, the whole matter
is a gallant child, one that indeed physics the
That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on,
The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead,
You'ld call your children yours.
For I do fear eyes over--to shipboard
Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,
Cry lost, and so good night!
exercises than formerly he hath appeared.
To have a worthy feeding: but I have it
Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now,
Camillo, sir, I spake with him, who now
A most unworthy and unnatural lord
To her allowing husband!
To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
No, if I mistake
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful
business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier
I daily vow to use it. Come and lead me
and wouldst adventure
bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show
More than mistress of
Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve
It is my father's will I should take on me
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an
Do seem to be of ours?
She dances featly.
Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
Until a time may serve: for present vengeance,
Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
Up in my heart, which I have given already,
But not for joy, not joy. This entertainment
I call upon thee.
these four threes of herdsmen.
secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all
Well with this lord: there was not full a month
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
unto whom I was going, I shall there have money, or
His smiles,
Prefix'd for's parting: yet, good deed, Leontes,
Be known when 'tis brought forth.
The art itself is nature.
Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir,
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
had not taken yourself with the manner.
Cease, no more.
drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst
Bohemia greets you from himself by me,
Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career
To be your prisoner should import offending,
Let me be punish'd, that have minded you
We had the tune on't a month ago.
think it fit to shore them again and that the
Either for life or death, upon the earth
I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Exeunt
Than history can pattern, though devised
O, my heart!
Yes, if you will, my lord.
As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,
As like Hermione as is her picture,
No, by my life.
This child was prisoner to the womb and is
This is strange: methinks
pawn till it be brought you.
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Cry fie upon my grave!
We may live, son, to shed many more.
yields pound and odd shilling, fifteen hundred
What colour for my visitation shall I
Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone!
Satisfy!
I' the boldness of your speech.
open't. What's within, boy?
The seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd
Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
A just and open trial. While she lives
There have been,
another encounter, which lames report to follow it
wore three-pile, but now I am out of service:
It is his highness' pleasure that the queen
these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him: if he
shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name
You're liars all.
This cannot be but a great courtier.
Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
I shall report,
Here come those I have done good to against my will,
To fright me with your sprites, you're powerful at it.
Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
Became a bull, and bellow'd, the green Neptune
Nay, but hear me.
Where 'tis predominant, and 'tis powerful, think it,
I now name to you, and with speed so pace
And you shall pay well for 'em.
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
You, my lords,
He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow,
That you might well enjoy her.
Enter a Gentleman
Will you buy any tape,
The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid
your tongues, and not a word more.
He could never come better, he shall come in. I
With such a kind of love as might become
But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass
that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring
I will, my lord.
What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried
Hides not his visage from our cottage but
She had, and would incense me
I did not, sir:
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn,--or heard,--
By each particular star in heaven and
Which must be even as swiftly follow'd as
Than curse it then. But be it, let it live.
As now she might have done,
Indeed, my lord,
Which you have not redeem'd, indeed, paid down
He's beat from his best ward.
The adventure of her person?
helped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.
The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have
ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show
Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,
What you profess.
Where you'll be loath to be: besides you know
Would they else be content to die?
What! have I twice said well? when was't before?
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
The great Apollo suddenly will have
But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
What she should shame to know herself
This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
Your queen and I are devils: yet go on,
By the northern blasts twice o'er.
His vices, you would say, there's no virtue whipped
And let's be red with mirth.
With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay,
Do climate here! You have a holy father,
Music, awake her, strike!
gently considered, I'll bring you where he is
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
What an exchange had this been without boot! What
it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,
Prithee, let him.
The truth of your own seeming, that you may--
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Her portion equal his.
Good day, Camillo.
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:
If I might die within this hour, I have lived
To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
I speak amazedly, and it becomes
Our contract celebrated.
seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their
prince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hail, most royal sir!
As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
How he may soften at the sight o' the child:
The rarest of all women.
With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords,
For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes:
I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror
By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.
I must believe you, sir:
I so much thirst to see.
Hold up before him?
His daughter's trial! that he did but see
I thought she had some great matter there in hand,
services thou hast done, which if I have not enough
From those you sent to the oracle are come
Even he, my lord.
Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher,
It is required
Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,
I' fecks!
the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't be thy
Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.
How now! canst stand?
Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
it.
Shall be when your first queen's again in breath,
And I wish, my liege,
So aged as this seems.
Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
be a tall fellow of thy hands.
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
deliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this news
Ay, sir.
Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience,
Incertain lookers on. What were more holy
O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
So sure as this beard's grey,
Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own.
So well, nothing so well, no, nor mean better:
What, canst not rule her?
A shepherd's daughter.
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
than the poor thing is here. I'll take it up for
Burn hotter than my faith.
and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty
I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.
sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,'
To murder her I married.
And see what death is doing.
and a pair of sweet gloves.
He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes, no
see, there is such unity in the proofs. The mantle
rest of the herd to me that all their other senses
To show myself a glass.
Jove send her
Traitors!
She came from Libya.
With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
Commit me for committing honour, trust it,
I'll have no wife, Paulina.
I not purpose it.
A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
Thy father's ground.
Whose honour and whose honesty till now
The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all
Than a wild dedication of yourselves
Didst note it?
Let him that was the cause of this have power
Nor I, nor any
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
But to your protestation, let me hear
I ne'er heard yet
My dainty duck, my dear-a?
To some remote and desert place quite out
Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had
Which you knew great, and to the hazard
I cannot speak
Art thou my calf?
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness,
For what?
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth,
This is a brave fellow.
How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
Than I do now: with thought of such affections,
Stars, stars,
And own no other function: each your doing,
The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
have relished among my other discredits.
horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these
Lament till I am lost.
Now, good Camillo,
I thought of her,
are they gone, and there they intend to sup.
Our shame perpetual. Once a day I'll visit
Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
Be advised.
speak you.
With labour and the thing she took to quench it,
Must I receive, whose every word deserves
We can: my royal liege,
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.
I'll not remember you of my own lord,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not
Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moe
Proceed:
I know ye well enough.
Say so but seldom.
But that you have your father's bosom there
Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know
But yet hear this: mistake me not, no life,
To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd
pies, mace, dates?--none, that's out of my note,
His very air, that I should call you brother,
And so deliver, I am put to sea
To see the statue of our queen: your gallery
Are all call'd neat.--Still virginalling
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Great Apollo
[Aside]
Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him:
courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means
Beseech you, tenderly apply to her
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!
combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in
To save this bastard's life,--for 'tis a bastard,
The same I am, ere ancient'st order was
SCENE I. A room in LEONTES' palace.
Your heart is full of something that does take
But not deliver'd. O, hear me breathe my life
Twenty-three days
shepherd deliver the manner how he found it:
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he
That which my daughter came to look upon,
ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon
made me businesses which none without thee can
Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
Sweet sir, much better than I was, I can stand and
You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's see
When I have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen,
About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I
What with him? he comes not
Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,
man and his son aboard the prince: told him I heard
Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?
like you, sir?
them thyself or take away with thee the very
And one whom much I honour.
So I would you did, then 'twere past all doubt
SCENE III. A road near the Shepherd's cottage.
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
The purity and whiteness of my sheets,
For, being transported by my jealousies
On your displeasure's peril and on mine,
That honourable grief lodged here which burns
open. He was torn to pieces with a bear: this
That wilt not stay her tongue.
Which not to have done I think had been in me
'Tis time, descend, be stone no more, approach,
Golden quoifs and stomachers,
To the palace, an it like your worship.
I am robbed, sir, and beaten, my money and apparel
I am about, let them depart.
indeed and sung lamentably.
The fairest I have yet beheld, desires access
No, I'll none of you.
Why, this is a passing merry one and goes to
What, by a horseman, or a footman?
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
You have mistook, my lady,
We are to speak in public, for this business
Thou dost advise me
Is richly noted and here justified
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
I did not well I meant well. All my services
As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too
No more such wives, therefore, no wife: one worse,
Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!
What is the business?
her to her heart that she might no more be in danger
You are married?
Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.
me your good report to the prince my master.
not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after
'Tis rigor and not law. Your honours all,
Thou hast sworn my love to be.
I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me
Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast,
With great creating nature.
Exit
Break up the seals and read.
No, I'll not rear
Thou hast sworn it more to me:
He took good rest to-night,
With customary compliment, when he,
What you have underta'en to do in's absence.
Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death
being gracious, than they are in losing them when
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
I am a poor fellow, sir.
things, all but what she has with her: this being
see him a man.
Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.
Of breaking honesty--horsing foot on foot?
O Hermione,
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on,
Of all professors else, make proselytes
So sovereignly being honourable.
Swear his thought over
I think, Camillo?
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy
The justice of your bearts will thereto add
I yield all this,
Take't up, I say, give't to thy crone.
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
My leash unwillingly.
son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not
I shall have more than you can dream of yet,
I pray you, do not push me, I'll be gone.
So and no other, as yourself commanded:
Exeunt Gentleman and Attendants
SCENE II. Bohemia. The palace of POLIXENES.
Is she become the suitor?
of a true subject, didst counsel and aid them, for
As little skill to fear as I have purpose
Then, till the fury of his highness settle,
beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not
Here 'tis, commends it to your blessing.
A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable
Here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon
To put apart these your attendants, I
motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's
Of us too much beloved. Let us be clear'd
To lie close by his honest bones: but now
On his shoulder, and his, her face o' fire
I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
give him gold, and though authority be a stubborn
smutch'd thy nose?
I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate:
Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
ears a fork'd one!
ballads, we'll buy the other things anon.
Why, what need we
Neither.
The wrong I did myself, which was so much,
one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.
That will say anything but were they false
'This is put forth too truly:' besides, I have stay'd
Even to their ships.
That's enough.
feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
I am innocent as you.'
I know not, an't like you.
Yond crickets shall not hear it.
You tempt him over-much.
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
Enter a third Gentleman
Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man
The king is not at the palace, he is gone aboard a
She is as forward of her breeding as
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
I think, this coming summer, the King of Sicilia
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard,
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?
I think there is not in the world either malice or
I will stand betwixt you and danger.
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see
them: there may be matter in it.
Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest
Dispatch, I prithee.
The hand was fair before! I have put you out:
shalt accompany us to the place, where we will, not
Exit with the child
There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress
thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
Without more mercy, to its own protection
The cause were not in being,--part o' the cause,
Not a word, a word, we stand upon our manners.
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and
I would not be a stander-by to hear
My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,
on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What
Yea, scandalous to the world.
Bless me from marrying a usurer!
Do their best office, if they can but stay you
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses!
I'll swear for 'em.
end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Perchance are to this business purblind? say.
if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must
Cannot be mute,--or thought,--for cogitation
Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,
Are you in earnest, sir?
The higher powers forbid!
Which I protest against--I am assisted
The time is worth the use on't.
You have not dared to break the holy seal
I would there were no age between sixteen and
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?
I trust I shall. My women, come, you have leave.
But first I'll do my errand. The good queen,
a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do
[Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaint
picture, and what I saw, to my good use I
lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus, who
This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys:
Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
I have loved thee,--
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
And pay them when you part.
We'll make an instrument of this, omit
As my Antigonus to break his grave
And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
I then do most go right.
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer:
business is performed, and remain, as he says, your
How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome,
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
ACT IV
sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses, you
Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
Hang all the husbands
I cannot name the disease, and it is caught
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
Your actions are my dreams,
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!
Enter FLORIZEL and PERDITA
but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!
Here where we are.
Exeunt
But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?
cap-a-pe, and one that will either push on or pluck
false of heart that way, and that he knew, I warrant
Reward did threaten and encourage him,
And handed love as you do, I was wont
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
But she'll not stumble.
Enter Clown
our guests? 'tis well they are whispering: clamour
My traffic is sheets, when the kite builds, look to
I now go toward him, therefore follow me
Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
How if it be false, son?
Must it be violent, and as he does conceive
Than you are mad, which is enough, I'll warrant,
loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.
put me into this apparel.
great matter.
No barricado for a belly, know't,
How often said, my dignity would last
As you had slept between: Leontes leaving,
with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not
With them forgive yourself.
The silence often of pure innocence
In those unfledged days was my wife a girl,
'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'
I cannot do't without counters. Let me see, what am
Prosperity's the very bond of love,
Hath been beyond account.
The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.
Break too.
Unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here,
Of pity, not revenge!
Farewell, our brother.
The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
The lark, that tirra-lyra chants,
Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords,
nutmegs, seven, a race or two of ginger, but that I
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.
therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal
Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:
Even with such life of majesty, warm life,
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay
And arms her with the boldness of a wife
Not doing 't and being done: he, most humane
What fit is this, good lady?
PAULINA draws a curtain, and discovers HERMIONE standing like a statue
forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this
a charitable office.
embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed
Thoughts that would thick my blood.
Prithee bring him in, and let him approach singing.
Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense.
wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.
I willingly obey your command.
O sweet Paulina,
make an exchange, therefore discase thee instantly,
At my petition, I beseech you, rather
I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better
And mark what way I make: come, good my lord.
Do you neglect them?
Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
Communicatest with dreams,--how can this be?--
So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
Faster than thought or time.
Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours
I must be patient till the heavens look
Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes,
They're here with me already, whispering, rounding
O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my
Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts,
Is whispering nothing?
Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an
walk: I will even take my leave of you, and pace
She is spread of late
Lawful as eating.
Endured all weathers.
tears that ever we shed.
To die when I desire.
Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
No, he must not.
settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
Enter CLEOMENES and DION
Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come,
[Picking his pocket]
Ha!
Would have shed water out of fire ere done't:
Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart,
Nothing may give us aid.
To save the innocent: any thing possible.
Even for your son's sake, and thereby for sealing
Grovelling on the ground
that kills my heart.
Must it be great, and as his person's mighty,
Remain a pinch'd thing, yea, a very trick
I know't too well.
I'll ha' thee burnt.
None, sir, I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
ones and millions.
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.
And this my neighbour too?
In every mess have folly and the feeders
And nobleness impose: at least thus much:
If you would seek us,
Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here,
hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer:
a bodkin's point.
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
Tongue-tied, our queen?
Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.
His garments are rich, but he wears
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
For a reply, at least if you make a care
The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
good masters.
Good queen!
The father, all whose joy is nothing else
Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:
Our praises are our wages: you may ride's
Come, come, he must not.
the letters of Antigonus found with it which they
burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump
life, for then we are sure they are true.
Very true, sir, he, sir, he, that's the rogue that
Her children not her husband's!
it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel, therefore
Grace to boot!
To see her in your arms.
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
The queen of curds and cream.
some stair-work, some trunk-work, some
Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
wear their plackets where they should bear their
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a
Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'ld bid you mark
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
seven years
As merry as you will.
And merrily hent the stile-a:
By any understanding pate but thine?
Howe'er you lean to the nayward.
him, though removed fifty times, shall all come
a jealous tyrant, his innocent babe truly begotten,
though I am not bookish, yet I can read
I must be answer'd. Dost thou hear, Camillo,
Nay, but hear me.
With what's unreal thou coactive art,
Prithee, son, do, for we must be gentle, now we are
And call me father? better burn it now
'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.
shoulder-blade is out.
At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle,
Go then, and with a countenance as clear
You knew of his departure, as you know
That thus affect'st a sheep-hook! Thou old traitor,
I am like you, they say.
the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April,
I must be present at your conference.
Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed
best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find
You do awake your faith. Then all stand still,
Good queen, I say good queen,
Look to your babe, my lord, 'tis yours:
Having no warrant.
That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant
I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
ailest thou, man?
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,
Money's a medler.
Softly, dear sir, good sir, softly. You ha' done me
open't. So, let's see: it was told me I should be
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
confessed and lamented by the king, how
is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what
Neither.
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd
Of tyranny and will ignoble make you,
That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?
country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more, whose very
What you must say, that he shall not perceive
In thy not chiding, for she was as tender
Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe:
Be born another such.
Have strain'd to appear thus: if one jot beyond
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
Or what is now received: I witness to
Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
shalt hear, 'tis in three parts.
Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me, for had I
father, for the king's son took me by the hand, and
gentlemen.
No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue,
And take you by the hand, but then you'll think--
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
With age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear?
Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
For me to try how: all I know of it
The verier wag o' the two?
my brother, whose loss of his most precious queen
these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the
Would hang themselves. Physic for't there is none,
winds. The heavens continue their loves!
Her heart is but o'ercharged, she will recover:
For them to play at will. How came the posterns
Her brother, having both their country quitted
Exit
Than you to punish.
Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
To force him after: in whose company
Methinks a father
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:
CAMILLO, FLORIZEL, and PERDITA come forward
A party in this alteration, finding
Good lady,
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
Known and allied to yours.
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
Has made thee swell thus.
even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble
Force her hence.
Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
and no more ado. Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'
To the noble heart. What's gone and what's past help
That I was nothing.
the verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the king
You gods, look down
No settled senses of the world can match
troll-my-dames, I knew him once a servant of the
I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.
My lord the king, the king!
Among the infinite doings of the world,
As I seem now. Their transformations
I am sorry that by hanging thee I can
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you,
And never to my red-look'd anger be
Afresh within me, and these thy offices,
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags, and
We are lucky, boy, and to be so still requires
The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
You have drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
Re-enter Servant
More penitence than done trespass: at the last,
Women will love her, that she is a woman
Without more overture.
Of sprites and goblins.
Come on, strike up!
Ay, my lord, even so
Stand by, a looker on.
To miseries enough, no hope to help you,
Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now,
As your good flock shall prosper.
Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.
Do bid it welcome.
It cannot fail but by
And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by
To see his nobleness!
Masterly done:
would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants
Desires you to attach his son, who has--
present. Why should I carry lies abroad?
embraces his son-in-law, then again worries he his
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition
How! caught of me!
In such a business.
Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you
Fie, fie! no thought of him:
Added to their familiarity,
That go before it.
go on the right hand: I will but look upon the
How could that be?
By its own visage: if I then deny it,
To see her women? any of them? Emilia?
I'll follow instantly.
See, your guests approach:
he is, and in the hottest day prognostication
If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
If this be magic, let it be an art
Do, Paulina,
The pleasure of that madness. Let 't alone.
Since fate, against thy better disposition,
under the hangman: which though it be great pity,
desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent
may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse
But with a lingering dram that should not work
As it is here set down.
Exeunt POLIXENES, HERMIONE, and Attendants
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
Not for because
Become some women best, so that there be not
Measured to look upon you, whom he loves--
Is never free of. But, beseech your grace,
three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.
And that to the infection of my brains
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left
Contract us 'fore these witnesses.
Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain
Well, be't so, prithee.
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited
Sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd
O'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried
I am as ignorant in that as you
Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo,
A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!
If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
Worthy Camillo,
At my request he would not.
Aside
ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad,
our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your
then, death, death!
My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart,
Such goodly things as you!
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
separation of their society, their encounters,
Of his most sovereign name, consider little
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
What holier than, for royalty's repair,
gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he
Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd
Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure
grant this.
Though bearing misery, I desire my life
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, good
As every present time doth boast itself
But durst not tempt a minister of honour,
franklins say it, I'll swear it.
foot, you shall see, as I have said, great
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
Exit
Were there necessity in your request, although
I mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession,
Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.
Ay, my good lord.
Becomes a woman best, I'll take't upon me:
That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence
Now, in good time!
may be to the flight of my master.
I like your silence, it the more shows off
These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is
Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now,
None rare, my lord.
As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of
Of good Polixenes, and my ground to do't
The statue of her mother.
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?
His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: thence,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
You put me off with limber vows, but I,
But know not how it went. My second joy
I am appointed him to murder you.
But this most cruel usage of your queen,
To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,
The hostess-ship o' the day.
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half
I would most gladly know the issue of it.
That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay
His dignity and duty both cast off--
I did in time collect myself and thought
This female bastard hence and that thou bear it
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,
and, having flown over many knavish professions, he
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,
To mend her kissing with!
Good my liege, I come,
art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.
Or Cytherea's breath, pale primroses
pretty one, a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape:
But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
How now there!
And so have I, boy.
beshrew them!
It is yours,
Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange
And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd,
tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
To plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass
I' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead,
neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make
Enter another Gentleman
Upon a barren mountain and still winter
therefore it behoves men to be wary.
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
And made between's by vows. Thou hast found mine,
The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs
Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,
Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
That's likewise part of my intelligence, but, I
and undoes description to do it.
Which you say adds to nature, is an art
O Paulina,
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.
A boy?
Equal with wondering: what of her ensues
Enter a Servant
We honour you with trouble: but we came
Thou wilt perform my bidding.
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging
have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having
That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
What is the news i' the court?
FLORIZEL and AUTOLYCUS exchange garments
And begin, 'Why to me?'
Sir, my gracious lord,
Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift?
Myself thus alter'd with 't.
joy waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes,
What lady-she her lord. You'll stay?
of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding,
As shall become your highness, where you may
Your wonder: but yet speak, first, you, my liege,
thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must
faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are
Go thou away:
The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack,
There is no truth at all i' the oracle:
[Aside]  Very wisely, puppies!
And through him what is nearest to him, which is
Tell her, Emilia.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
I say she's dead, I'll swear't. If word nor oath
Sir, spare your threats:
I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
rich by the fairies. This is some changeling:
Fairly offer'd.
no harm, good man,' puts him off, slights him, with
the like occasion whereon my services are now on
Your guest, then, madam:
From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
My marvel and my message. To your court
But, my daughter,
Wherefore, gentle maiden,
A place whereto you'll go?
toads carbonadoed.
You shall not go: a lady's 'Verily' 's
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore,
But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
me the king's brother-in-law.
Cyprus black as e'er was crow,
and vengeance bitter, but those that are germane to
Did verily bear blood?
I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand:
SCENE I. A room in LEONTES' palace.
I smell the trick on't.
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad,
Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
Re-enter Gaoler, with EMILIA
which is lost be not found.
Exit Gentleman
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
sometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.
this year connive at us, and we may do any thing
So singular in each particular,
O my poor father!
is too soft for him, say I	draw our throne into a
in the view of the shepherd: so that all the
Exit Servant
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon
Have taken treasure from her lips--
attentiveness wounded his daughter, till, from one
For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter,
With one 'We thank you' many thousands moe
And bear the sow-skin budget,
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between
him.
Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour,
thee, look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's
Go, do our bidding, hence!
Those of your fact are so--so past all truth:
Standing like stone with thee.
Your kindness better.
All that you speak shows fair.
Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best
Of my young play-fellow.
Thou art Hermione, or rather, thou art she
And welcome to our shearing!
I told you what would come of this: beseech you,
which is in the keeping of Paulina,--a piece many
Is there no manners left among maids? will they
We are tougher, brother,
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd
Camillo was his help in this, his pander:
As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd,
Now, my fair'st friend,
on thee, rather than have these off.
I do, and will fetch off Bohemia for't,
whisper him in your behalfs, and if it be in man
and vengeance for't
Never, but once.
That makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is
Say it be, 'tis true.
The keys of all the posterns: please your highness
Exit
Of laughing with a sigh?--a note infallible
My lord?
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
aboard, tender your persons to his presence,
joy crown another, so and in such manner that it
I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd,
For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.
I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from't
How, Camillo,
What colour are your eyebrows?
To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.
Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,
'Tis not a visitation framed, but forced
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.
Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself
Who least will seem to do so, my past life
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun
I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,
At each his needless heavings, such as you
process-server, a bailiff, then he compassed a
To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son,
time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their
hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my
Dear, look up:
Do come with words as medicinal as true,
The standing of his body.
Lawn as white as driven snow,
Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.
Boldly 'not guilty,' the imposition clear'd
His wish'd ability, he had himself
My swift command, though I with death and with
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't
Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
O, not by much.
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
Have you thought on
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly,
Let's have some merry ones.
But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
ACT II
than the stripes I have received, which are mighty
than you'ld think, sister.
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,
Ay, but why?
Should yet say 'Sir, no going.' Verily,
Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
Flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
Some remedies for life.
more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.
Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy!
Much comfort in't, says 'My poor prisoner,
As heavens forefend!--your ruin, marry her,
I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
And from your sacred vials pour your graces
An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for
bawdry, which is strange, with such delicate
Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon
One of these two must be necessities,
thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness, then
To bless the bed of majesty again
Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
pleased, let them come in, but quickly now.
My mate, that's never to be found again,
Myself to see the issue.
Which shows me mine changed too, for I must be
Left his to the worthiest, so his successor
You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
conduit of many kings' reigns. I never heard of such
That mercy does, for calumny will sear
Sir, my liege,
Enter AUTOLYCUS, singing
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
For 'tis most dangerous.
Mark your divorce, young sir,
Is creeping toward me, how far off, how near,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
Make that thy question, and go rot!
the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful
Knows he of this?
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Your discontenting father strive to qualify
And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
The sacred honour of himself, his queen's,
As was your former, but she shall be such
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,
years in doing and now newly performed by that rare
He would not stay at your petitions: made
Commit them to the fire!
That
You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost--
He thus should steal upon us.
More than the common blocks: not noted, is't,
When I shall gust it last. How came't, Camillo,
And that beyond commission, and I find it,
To bring false generations: they are co-heirs,
Drawing her aside
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Even in these looks I made.
the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall
You must not enter.
Look for no less than death.
Thou wilt amend thy life?
For to a vision so apparent rumour
And he, and more
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I am
There is a plot against my life, my crown,
To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
No richer than his honour: how he glisters
Her natural posture!
On your allegiance,
He is dishonour'd by a man which ever
Is piled upon his faith and will continue
her husband, another elevated that the oracle was
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
By this we gather
extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.
As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry
I am so fraught with curious business that
There lie, and there thy character: there these,
on's teeth.
Summon a session, that we may arraign
shoulder-bone, how he cried to me for help and said
Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king,
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
by mine honour,
Lay't so to his charge:
Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,
If you may please to think I love the king
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Never to marry but by my free leave?
Without a burthen: time as long again
He hath paid you all he promised you, may be, he has
No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy
May think anon it moves.
Did ever so long live, no sorrow
Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!
She hangs about his neck:
From course required, or else thou must be counted
Sir, my lord,
Why, that was when
into my note.
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
As 'twere i' the father's person, kisses the hands
there's some boot.
Ha' not you seen, Camillo,--
But how, is to be question'd, for I saw her,
To the freshest things now reigning and make stale
Go to, go to!
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I do give lost, for I do feel it gone,
And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip,
If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,
think me still no gentleman born: you were best say
Nothing but that, move still, still so,
I have done.
Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Where's Bohemia? speak.
And nothing marted with him. If your lass
The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter
Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the
I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,
Gentle spectators, that I now may be
The most replenish'd villain in the world,
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth
Camillo for the minister to poison
wife within a mile where my land and living lies,
How! not women?
For a worthy lady
and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this
I leave out ceremony.
Digest it with a custom, I should blush
So it is.
As in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as 'twere
To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,
Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
It was i' the offering!
Of the whole dungy earth.
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Concern me the reporting.
but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the
Yet nature might have made me as these are,
Marry, will I, and you shall help to put him i' the ground.
Would be unparallel'd.
As you feel doing thus, and see withal
learnedly handle, though they come to him by the
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet,
Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth
O that he were alive, and here beholding
To visit the next room, I'll presently
Very true, and but a month old.
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife,
Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there
king, my master, hath sent for me, to whose feeling
though not personal, have been royally attorneyed
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
Is it true too, think you?
That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself
Laying down the child
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
And first-fruits of my body, from his presence
aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion, then, raw as
I shall do good.
Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes
Yes, if there were no other excuse why they should
My wife is nothing, nor nothing have these nothings,
Would blow you through and through.
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things
for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever
And will by twos and threes at several posterns
A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,
Have I here touch'd Sicilia and from him
And I but dream'd it. As you were past all shame,--
By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
So 'tis said, sir, about his son, that should have
Should a like language use to all degrees
virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.
You will not own it.
Forbiddenly.
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o'
Blemish'd his gracious dam: this is not, no,
I'll not put
Your honour and your goodness is so evident
Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?
I hope so, sir, for I have about me many parcels of charge.
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords,
Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha's,
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
Turn then my freshest reputation to
No, in good earnest.
Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns
Not like a guest, so you shall pay your fees
By bud of nobler race: this is an art
'Tis past enduring.
There is an art which in their piedness shares
with Polixenes, king of Bohemia, and conspiring
sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds,
officious, for I am proof against that title and
look upon his removedness, from whom I have this
When my good falcon made her flight across
The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd
That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy
desire to live.
Exit
every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods, every tod
no money of me, but being enthralled as I am, it
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
the spirits o' the dead
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the
You scarce can right me throughly then to say
Exeunt
So she does any thing, though I report it,
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Produce the prisoner.
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:
Stand you auspicious!
To get slips of them.
SCENE I. Antechamber in LEONTES' palace.
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any
Tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were
This is all:
ape: he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that
Re-enter Gentleman, with the Gaoler
And only live by gazing.
You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.
An honourable husband. Come, Camillo,
sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
I dare be sworn
Resolved for flight. Now were I happy, if
the meeting of the two kings?
With your crown'd brother and these your contracted
Not she which burns in't. I'll not call you tyrant,
Thou speak'st truth.
That I have borne your father?
Be pilot to me and thy places shall
Discovering himself
Let him know't.
And think upon my bidding.
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his
But not take in the mind.
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
On your command.
And come again to me, who, on my life,
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way
What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue,
To CAMILLO
think so, which is another spur to my departure.
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight,
'Tis grace indeed.
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
daughter with clipping her, now he thanks the old
What you can make her do,
Giving it to PERDITA
The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,
But nature makes that mean: so, over that art
my pack will hold.
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
To vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen
Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness
Of great Apollo's priest, and that, since then,
It was my folly, if industriously
Enter LEONTES, ANTIGONUS, Lords, and Servants
extremity of the one, it must needs be.
ACT III
found his heir?
The violent carriage of it
Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
That doth utter all men's ware-a.
While we lie tumbling in the hay.
Look on her, mark her well, be but about
When once she is my wife.
And those that bear them living.
I turn my glass and give my scene such growing
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
To see him any more,--cast your good counsels
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
I told her so, my lord,
May a free face put on, derive a liberty
holding up of hands, with countenances of such
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: but
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
Here a dance of twelve Satyrs
So please you, sir, their speed
So, so: farewell, we are gone.
Good my lord, forbear:
You that have been so tenderly officious
those things you found about her, those secret
Of our most gracious mistress.
Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?
whereof being by circumstances partly laid open,
Which never tender lady hath born greater,
Have you deserved: it is my father's music
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself
Is dead.
Of every wind that blows.
Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.
the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good
the sea or weather.
Humbling their deities to love, have taken
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
cannot be able to express it.
O my most sacred lady!
I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight
Not at all, good lady:
There was a man--
[Reads]            Hermione, queen to the worthy
Enter Servant
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not
For ever
To LEONTES
which none must know but the king, and which he
And then run mad indeed, stark mad! for all
Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
Shall best instruct you, measure me, and so
heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed
Should rift to hear me, and the words that follow'd
As he from heaven merits it, with you
Enter Shepherd, Clown, MOPSA, DORCAS, and others, with POLIXENES and CAMILLO disguised
utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's
I am glad at heart
As he had seen't or been an instrument
There's some ill planet reigns:
Who in rebellion with himself will have
How would he look, to see his work so noble
For present comfort and for future good,
My true Paulina,
Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
To execute the charge my father gave me
Hark ye,
Nay, but you will?
Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina,
Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold
yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,
Pray you, a word.
cork into a hogshead. And then for the
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
From all dishonesty he can: in this,
Have too much blood in him.
To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow,
Nourish the cause of his awaking: I
Commonly are, the want of which vain dew
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
Shall satisfy your father.
May hold together: on her frights and griefs,
weather continuing, this mystery remained
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
No, good-faced sir, no, sweet sir.
Prithee, no more, cease, thou know'st
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
She is,
put in the book of virtue!
Say no more:
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband
Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou,
For has not the divine Apollo said,
How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly
Never, Paulina, so be blest my spirit!
HERMIONE comes down
To most that teach.
paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.
SCENE II. A room of state in the same.
Let villany itself forswear't. I must
Between their births.
also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain
thou, Hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance
And with his varying childness cures in me
A savour that may strike the dullest nostril
Exit HERMIONE, guarded, with Ladies
Your brows are blacker, yet black brows, they say,
Not your gaoler, then,
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine,
If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
If she did know me one. Away with her!
Had our prince,
Pray you then,
You precious winners all, your exultation
Of this escape and whither they are bound,
Exit, pursued by a bear
And when I wander here and there,
When you cast out, it still came home.
A callat
That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts
which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the
So stands this squire
There is none worthy,
Might come to me again. Who's there?
so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:
But as you shake off one to take another,
And there present yourself and your fair princess,
He'll stay my lord.
Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
and blood has not offended the king, and so your
The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
When she was young you woo'd her, now in age
Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.
We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:
To put you to't. But come, our dance, I pray:
To an infected jelly and my name
So easily open?
No father owning it,--which is, indeed,
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit
He would not call me son.
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a
Madam, he hath not slept tonight, commanded
And left them
To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter
flayed already.
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go see
To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and
If not, how best to bear it.
Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage,
His execution sworn.
You did mistake.
Get undescried.
This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
The news, Rogero?
Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?--may't be?--
What is this? sport?
capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain
naming punishes me with the remembrance of that
Mark our contract.
Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,
Or not my father's. For I cannot be
O my lord!
Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,
The violation of my faith, and then
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!
The crown imperial, lilies of all kinds,
Exeunt
Behind the tuft of pines I met them, never
And still rest thine. The storm begins, poor wretch,
Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
If this be nothing.
--thou must think there's a necessity in't,--and
My people did expect my hence departure
Or else a hovering temporizer, that
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia,
What dost thou then in prison?
The king's will be perform'd!
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,
Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul,
neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
lord the king, thy royal husband: the pretence
With what encounter so uncurrent I
not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am
sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute
Would thus have wrought you,--for the stone is mine--
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
What, like a corse?
rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear
To laughter, as I take it,
Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not
Music
Infected as her life, she would not live
Too noble for this place.
And most opportune to our need I have
Blue, my lord.
The other for some while a friend.
Of this fair couple, meets he on the way
Have left me issueless, and your father's blest,
Of any point in't shall not only be
Not weighing well the end, if ever fearful
Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
Re-enter POLIXENES
What hast here? ballads?
That I must bear a part.
You have tripp'd since.
as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into
What noise there, ho?
and a dram dead, then recovered again with
But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too much
The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
To o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath
Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
Exit
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
And would by combat make her good, so were I
I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made
You have of these pedlars, that have more in them
All mine own folly--the society,
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.
all my trumpery, not a counterfeit stone, not a
As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many
not too late now.
matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing
Re-enter AUTOLYCUS
HERMIONE swoons
As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?
That wear upon your virgin branches yet
So please you, madam,
Exeunt
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
A graceful gentleman, against whose person,
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
have missingly noted, he is of late much retired
Exeunt
To me can life be no commodity:
A cause more promising
The pale moon shines by night:
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,
As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain.
Praise her but for this her without-door form,
The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?
of losing.
The times that brought them in, so shall I do
We'll part the time between's then, and in that
Exit Gaoler
Thy wife Paulina more.' And so, with shrieks
I never wish'd to see you sorry, now
Both disobedience and ingratitude
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and
As thou art tender to't.
No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made
He makes a July's day short as December,
Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!
Is that Camillo was an honest man,
With this young prince.
A way to make us better friends, more known.
I knew she would.
The keeper of the prison, call to him,
a great man, I'll warrant, I know by the picking
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies
The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides
Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
She the adulteress, for the harlot king
When she will take the rein I let her run,
Enter LEONTES, with ANTIGONUS, Lords and others
are forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!
Most worthy madam,
To load my she with knacks: I would have ransack'd
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more
Polixenes blameless, Camillo a true subject, Leontes
I may be negligent, foolish and fearful,
More worth than any man, men, that she is
Get you hence, for I must go
Our rustic garden's barren, and I care not
For my lads to give their dears:
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
For being more stone than it? O royal piece,
Camillo has betray'd me,
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now
Takest up the princess by that forced baseness
Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's,
You woo'd me the false way.
Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, there's comfort in't
That you may know you shall not want, one word.
be not too rough for some that know little but
Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot with
Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,
preposterous estate as we are.
In those foundations which I build upon,
will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
To have them recompensed as thought on.
shorn. what comes the wool to?
The offences we have made you do we'll answer,
As deep as that, though true.
By my white beard,
Our gentry than our parents' noble names,
Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Is't not the tenor of his oracle,
My women may be with me, for you see
And tell 's a tale.
Take hands, a bargain!
Present our services to a fine new prince
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
shall know within this hour, if I may come to the
The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
[Aside]  What I do next, shall be to tell the king
so he then took her to be, who began to be much
We were, fair queen,
every lane's end, every shop, church, session,
O my brother,
The testimony on my part no other
Are they returned to the court?
Exit
That presses him from sleep.
What, neither?
Is all as monstrous to our human reason
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:
Follows singing
child! look thee here, take up, take up, boy,
stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it
has the prettiest love-songs for maids, so without
Thorough my rust! and how his pity
there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,
her,' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,
Properly ours.
This your request
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
The centre is not big enough to bear
To take off so much grief from you as he
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
To speak your deeds, not little of his care
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
True, too true, my lord:
That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured
Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems,
In ignorant concealment.
Of trembling winter, the fairest
Which then will speak, that you must
O, that must be
By law and process of great nature thence
softly towards my kinsman's.
I' the name of me--
Takes off his false beard
She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me
I would you had been by the ship side, to have
That all your acts are queens.
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
been the finder out of this secret, it would not
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be
any thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you,
Than to perform it first.
dying, I with things newborn. Here's a sight for
father brother, and then the prince my brother and
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say
As I am now unhappy, which is more
Pray you now, buy it.
Can send his brother: and, but infirmity
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
complaint they have to the king concerns him
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
We need no grave to bury honesty:
hanging, yields a careful man work.
But only seeing, all other circumstances
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he
She should not visit you.
Enter Clown
Your joys with like relation. Go together,
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers:
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his
What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
For you there's rosemary and rue, these keep
me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's
The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
They will bring all, whose spiritual counsel had,
gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for
Almost as like as eggs, women say so,
Pray heartily he be at palace.
Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us,
A merry heart goes all the day,
Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes
You know me, do you not?
I do believe it.
and children are even now to be afresh lamented.
That she is living,
But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question you
SONG
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady,
sight of him.
Inclining to them both: were my wife's liver
The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the
That's true enough,
Would sing her song and dance her turn, now here,
Who does infect her?
Care not for issue,
To make her speak as move.
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire,
'Tis none of mine.
Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
bowling, it will please plentifully.
'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a
Or how stolen from the dead.
not in't, but they themselves are o' the mind, if it
My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools,
SCENE IV. The Shepherd's cottage.
Or from the all that are took something good,
Once more, take her hence.
Would I were dead, but that, methinks, already--
matter to alter it. You have an unspeakable
And speak his very heart.
My lord,
changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were
danced before the king, and not the worst of the
Conduct me to the queen.
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
These your unusual weeds to each part of you
And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
I'll blush you thanks.
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!
Re-enter Clown and Shepherd
Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath
stars with oaths,
I prithee tell me, cram's with praise, and make's
She had just cause.
There's time enough for that,
I will respect thee as a father if
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
Exit Clown
Then list to me:
A school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!
The fixture of her eye has motion in't,
I think so too, for never gazed the moon
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say you
Out!
A nest of traitors!
Affliction alters.
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
For him, I partly know his mind--to find thee
You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
And do not say 'tis superstition, that
'I am yours for ever.'
crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
I'll geld 'em all, fourteen they shall not see,
make not this cheat bring out another and the
Make me not sighted like the basilisk:
May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother
But nothing alter'd: what I was, I am,
Was like to be the best.
To let him there a month behind the gest
One of the prettiest touches of all and that which
For her, my lord,
broken out within this hour that ballad-makers
Think you so, sir?
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
So much the more our carver's excellence,
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear
Leontes, king of Sicilia, thou art here accused and
What you do
Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder
He wishes earnestly you never may.
O, patience!
Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates!
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
door, you would never dance again after a tabour and
Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer's
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd upon
To be full like me: yet they say we are
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
By his great authority,
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
What was my first? it has an elder sister,
O lady Fortune,
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show
Do not draw the curtain.
To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you
The thought of my revenges that way
embassies, that they have seemed to be together,
Exeunt
fellow. Has he any unbraided wares?
Son of Polixenes, with his princess, she
Not so hot, good sir:
done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.
Until you see her die again, for then
married a shepherd's daughter.
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
and many other evidences proclaim her with all
For I will kiss her.
I will devise a death as cruel for thee
Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king:
his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I
And I had rather glib myself than they
passion of wonder appeared in them, but the wisest
Than what you look on now.
I cannot say 'tis pity
and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
With any but with us.
There is a sickness
Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream
Commend them and condemn them to her service
You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
With divers deaths in death.
Shall she within my power.
I have served Prince Florizel and in my time
And that unhappy king, my master, whom
The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd
Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
The access of gentle visitors!
themselves all men of hair, they call themselves
The running of one glass.
Have we pass'd through, not without much content
Sings
sea mocked them, and how the poor gentleman roared
Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord:
our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.
Me too, let me go thither.
May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take
My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
that thou wilt not be drunk, but I know thou art no
Come home to ye!--you must retire yourself
circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you
And with him rises weeping: these are flowers
That come before the swallow dares, and take
By my regard, but kill'd none so. Camillo,--
How merited to be so, since he came,
In whose success we are gentle,--I beseech you,
Enter HERMIONE guarded, PAULINA and Ladies attending
Enter AUTOLYCUS and a Gentleman
Now Jove afford you cause!
May this, almost a miracle, be done?
That calumny doth use--O, I am out--
Upon his palm!--How now, you wanton calf!
I do refer me to the oracle:
Yet, if my lord will marry,--if you will, sir,
The one for ever earn'd a royal husband,
Why, how now, father!
Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me
and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?
I prithee, call't. For this ungentle business
Upon the water as he'll stand and read
If at home, sir,
Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
O Doricles,
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a
Dear my brother,
Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems
Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:
It is, you lie, you lie:
That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
Your followers I will whisper to the business,
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason,
and the king shall live without an heir, if that
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's
Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known,
most homely shepherd, a man, they say, that from
You may say it, but not swear it.
Enter PAULINA, a Gentleman, and Attendants
let him have knowledge who I am.
hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it
means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.
Never till then.
Till his lost child be found? which that it shall,
By wicked powers.
One seven-night longer.
The by-gone day proclaim'd: say this to him,
From Dis's waggon! daffodils,
So sacred as it is, I have done sin:
clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
Though you would seek to unsphere the
To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
men, what you have to the king: being something
No more than were I painted I would wish
I know, in honour, O, that ever I
His business more material.
See, see, what a man you are now!
Behold our human actions, as they do,
Did this break-from her: 'Good Antigonus,
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would
And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks:
I care not:
Yet nature is made better by no mean
she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:
To FLORIZEL
And see it instantly consumed with fire,
To the dead bodies of my queen and son:
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care
But one that's here, and that's himself, for he
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side,
I'ld have you do it ever: when you sing,
From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
Enter LEONTES, CLEOMENES, DION, PAULINA, and Servants
subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on
The glistering of this present, as my tale
arraigned of high treason, in committing adultery
That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never
Seeing AUTOLYCUS
About some gossips for your highness.
Which way to be prevented, if to be,
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
he'll be made an example.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy,
Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and
In many singularities, but we saw not
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
daughter of most rare note: the report of her is
Any silk, any thread,
Partake to every one. I, an old turtle,
If the good truth were known.
I charged thee that she should not come about me:
On, good Camillo.
ears grew to his tunes.
A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,
Like an old tale still, which will have matter to
At the good queen's entreaty.
Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd
Sir, I think
ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon
To what we wildly do, so we profess
That he did stay?
Not only my success in Libya, sir,
No remedy.
But of the finer natures? by some severals
Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
Nine changes of the watery star hath been
Which waits upon worn times hath something seized
Sir, I will tell you,
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita,
their better safety, to fly away by night.
Hasting to the court.
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
Whilst I remember
Away with him! and let her sport herself
Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father:
And bring him up to liking.
Should be past grief: do not receive affliction
Like very sanctity, she did approach
Of prey that keep upon't.
It is the issue of Polixenes:
For girls of nine, O, think what they have done
Both dame and servant, welcomed all, served all,
Or breed upon our absence, that may blow
The mort o' the deer, O, that is entertainment
snow that's bolted
For I have heard it said
have none.
Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors,
Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
Hardly one subject.
Which often hath no less prevail'd than so
O that ever I was born!
lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.
I am gone for ever.
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and
Exit
But as the unthought-on accident is guilty
[Aside]  Though I am not naturally honest, I am so
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my
For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
He's simple and tells much.
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
Good my lord,
Thou canst not speak too much, I have deserved
SCENE II. A prison.
grace! Some say he shall be stoned, but that death
Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord,
to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.
Exit
Were in your love a whip to me, my stay
Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
His welcomes forth, asks thee the son forgiveness,
Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:
on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to
Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first
In every one of these no man is free,
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh
Maliciously like poison: but I cannot
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne
My child? away with't! Even thou, that hast
As, walk'd your first queen's ghost,
change garments with this gentleman: though the
Yourself, your queen, your son.
And play'd to take spectators. For behold me
Should not produce fair issue.
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,
More, she's a traitor and Camillo is
Now be you blest for it!
He's irremoveable,
Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night!
This news is mortal to the queen: look down
And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess
SCENE III. A chapel in PAULINA'S house.
The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
SCENE I. A sea-port in Sicilia.
He is not guilty of her coming hither.
Why, they stay at door, sir.
house. Shall we thither and with our company piece
the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
eyes, there was speech in their dumbness, language
Exeunt Shepherd and Clown
How blessed are we that are not simple men!
If this prove true, they'll pay for't:
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
How should this grow?
To have her honour true than your suspicion,
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:
That never mean to part.
Was not my lord
She embraces him.
Which he counts but a trifle.
He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply,
The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!
Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my
If you first sinn'd with us and that with us
With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
come something nearer.
Alas, poor soul!
Of you that yet are well.
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
When daffodils begin to peer,
and seen the spider.
Very nobly
But I'ld say he had not,
A shepherd's daughter,
Well, my lord,
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
But such a day to-morrow as to-day,
Upon his own report and I believe it,
Make your best haste, and go not
My ill suspicion. This is your son-in-law,
fardel will make him scratch his beard.
Be blamed for't how you might.
The mirth o' the feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair,
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my
If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister
Sir, the year growing ancient,
I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
Well said, Hermione.
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you
Happy be you!
Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence
Am heir to my affection.
But let him say so then, and let him go,
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
Say there be,
himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that
No court in Europe is too good for thee,
Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour,
Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. What
he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they
Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
So leaves me to consider what is breeding
What advocate hast thou to him?
At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,'
I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children,
Come, boy, I am past moe children, but thy sons and
of that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your
That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed
Is he won yet?
And after that trust to thee.
to do the prince my master good, which who knows how
By all their influences, you may as well
thee thine own goodness hath made, better not to
Still sleep mock'd death: behold, and say 'tis well.
Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that
You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,
She melted into air. Affrighted much,
Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand,
Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness, the one
They have been absent: 'tis good speed, foretells
Enter LEONTES, POLIXENES, FLORIZEL, PERDITA, CAMILLO, PAULINA, Lords, and Attendants
me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought
These rural latches to his entrance open,
Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
And takest it all for jest.
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain,
they have approved their virtues.
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Of this diseased opinion, and betimes,
To me or my swift passage, that I slide
You might have spoken a thousand things that would
To tire your royalty.
I swear to do this, though a present death
But till 'twere known!
Woe the while!
Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:
A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty
To lock up honesty and honour from
'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:'
conscience take it.
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an't
His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir
What you as from your father shall deliver,
Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post
And many a man there is, even at this present,
My gracious lord,
But what he did being childish?
You are abused and by some putter-on
As this world goes, to pass for honest.
The love I bore your queen--lo, fool again!--
I list not prophecy, but let Time's news
them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he
More straining on for plucking back, not following
till he had both tune and words, which so drew the
That changeth thus his manners.
There is no other way but to tell the king
Remember since you owed no more to time
on crutches till he had one.
wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes
I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace
You chose her, then I'ld shriek, that even your ears
I am a feather for each wind that blows:
In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me:
Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
I loved him as in honour he required,
For this design. What course I mean to hold
pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder? A
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation
O, peace, Paulina!
Of happy holding her.
Whither?
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
Though I am satisfied and need no more
daughters will be all gentlemen born.
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard,
That my ability may undergo
Here to this place, i' the open air, before
And in the stocks avouch it.
Bight Phoebus in his strength--a malady
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.
For this affliction has a taste as sweet
Would have him wed again.
I was about to speak and tell him plainly,
There is some sap in this.
I pray now, call her.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:
Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
Unworthy thee,--if ever henceforth thou
More criminal in thee than it,--so thou
More free than he is jealous.
Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
For visiting your highness: my best train
points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can
If any be, the trespass of the queen.
Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
Come, strike up!
Very sooth, to-morrow.
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
How, my lord!
From our free person she should be confined,
faults I have committed to your worship and to give
A moiety of the throne a great king's daughter,
Exeunt FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and CAMILLO
And give me leave,
Like to his father's greatness: his approach,
Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,
Be plainer with me, let me know my trespass
What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?
He shall not rule me.
Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,
handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.
There's no disjunction to be made, but by--
back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to
Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
I bless the time
Hereditary ours.
Of who she but bid follow.
stealing, fighting--Hark you now! Would any but
festival purses, and had not the old man come in
To better purpose.
Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid
Most incident to maids, bold oxlips and
With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal:
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
I'll make the statue move indeed, descend
appearing what we are, have some question with the
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Masks for faces and for noses,
That I have had of thee!
The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours
He something seems unsettled.
To CAMILLO
Than all thy woes can stir, therefore betake thee
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
Your sad tires in a mile-a.
for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy
Pardon, madam:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay:
milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he
You do not purpose to him, and as hardly
answer: thither with all greediness of affection
Our Perdita is found.
hath been since an ape-bearer, then a
My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name
I am none, by this good light.
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?
To see alike mine honour as their profits,
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
The anger of the king nor guilty of,
Shall I bring thee on the way?
Dear gentlewoman,
He bade me say so--more than all the sceptres
distraction that they were to be known by garment,
Good queen, my lord,
That e'er was heard or read!
With a sweet fellow to't?
In leads or oils? what old or newer torture
now.
And son unto the king, who, heavens directing,
When he shall miss me,--as, in faith, I mean not
Seeming and savour all the winter long:
Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
He has his health and ampler strength indeed
Ay, an it like your good worship.
That e'er I put between your holy looks
I mentioned a son o' the king's, which Florizel
Grace and remembrance be to you both,
it in the behalf of his friend: and I'll swear to
My lord's almost so far transported that
Lest she should be denied.
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.
Can do no more.
When most the truth, which I receive much better
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:
Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one,
You have paid home: but that you have vouchsafed,
On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,
What! look upon my brother: both your pardons,
Together working with thy jealousies,
That will be damn'd for't, would I knew the villain,
There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
See you these clothes? say you see them not and
A fair one are you--well you fit our ages
Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I
So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,
Unless another,
Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Why, boy, how is it?
And why so, my lord?
All tongues to talk their bitterest.
Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
Not able to produce more accusation
I little like.
Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
I am for you again: pray you, sit by us,
You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her
Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir
Good madam,--
Most goddess-like prank'd up: but that our feasts
What follows this?
Does change my disposition.
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.
Come to the pedlar,
Have said and writ so, but your writing now
Bred his hopes out of.
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true
Fortune speed us!
I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter:
land-service, to see how the bear tore out his
He shall not.
wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not
And gracious be the issue!
The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!
If we would have you.
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
what shame else belongs to't. To him will I present
often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for
